Reincarnation Beliefs Among Near
Death Experiencers

Amber D. Wells
   University of Connecticut

ABSTRACT: Several researchers have found that near-death experiences
(NDEs) tend to increase belief in reincarnation. This study was designed to
examine the factors underlying this belief shift. I used a questionnaire to
compare the tendency toward belief in reincarnation among NDErs, individ
uals merely interested in NDEs, and a non-experiencer, non-interest control
group. In addition, I interviewed 14 NDErs to gain insight into the factors
influencing NDErs' beliefs. NDErs' reincarnation belief shift appeared to be
due to (a) direct knowledge of reincarnation gained by some NDErs in the NDE
itself; (b) knowledge of reincarnation gained through a general psychic awak
ening following the NDE; or (c) exploration of alternative perceptions of reality
following the NDE.

  Previous research has indicated that following a near-death experi
ence (NDE), experiencers tend to exhibit a significant shift in their
beliefs on a wide range of subjects, including an increased acceptance of
others, a significantly greater belief in life after death, and a decreased
emphasis on material success (Atwater, 1988; Flynn, 1986; Grey, 1985;
Morse and Perry, 1992; Ring, 1984, 1992; Sutherland, 1992). These
belief changes have also included a general tendency toward an in
creased openness to the idea of reincarnation (Gallup and Proctor,
1982; Ring, 1980, 1984, 1992; Sutherland, 1992).

  It is this belief shift that was the focus of the present study. The
question of what precipitates the shift toward belief in reincarnation
has not yet been systematically addressed in the literature. In this

  Amber D. Wells was a student at the University of Connecticut at the time of this study.
This paper is based on her senior honors thesis under the direction of Kenneth Ring,
Ph.D. Reprint requests should be addressed to Ms. Wells at 2950 Bixby Lane, Apt. A213,
Boulder, CO 80303.

Journal of Near-Death Studies, 12(1) Fall 1993

1993 Human Sciences Press, Inc.                 17
18  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

study, I attempted to answer this question and, additionally, to deter
mine if a consistent picture of the purpose and process of reincarnation
would emerge from the accounts of near-death experiencers.

  Previous researchers such as Kenneth Ring have suggested that
near-death experiencers' increased openness toward the idea of reincar
nation may be less a factor of the NDE itself than a result of life
changes following the experience:

      Of course, there is no reason why an NDEr's openness toward reincar
      nation must stem directly from his NDE. In fact, I am quite convinced
      that in many cases it is more likely to be a response to an NDEr's
      reading and other life experiences following an NDE. (Ring, 1984, p.
     160)

Ring's study also suggested that belief in or openness to reincarnation
among NDErs was often accompanied by a more general endorsement
of Eastern religions. This has also been noted in the work of Cherie
Sutherland (1992). Other researchers (Twemlow, Gabbard, and Jones,
1982) found a similar shift in religious beliefs among individuals hav
ing not near-death experiences but out-of-body experiences. Thus it is
possible that the NDE is simply one of many catalysts for an increased
openness to reincarnation. In fact, it has been suggested that simply an
interest in near-death phenomena can serve as a catalyst for many of
the value changes expressed by NDErs, including an increased open
ness to the idea of reincarnation (K. Ring, personal communication,
1991).

  If it is true that the NDE influences individuals' reincarnation be
liefs simply by causing them to consider new religions or spiritual
ideas, then one would expect that individuals who exhibited an interest
in the NDE would also be prompted to undergo a similar belief shift. If,
on the other hand, it is something inherent in the NDE itself that leads
individuals to consider the possibility of reincarnation, then one would
expect that individuals who were merely interested in such phenomena
but who had not experienced it themselves would have reincarnation
beliefs that differed significantly from those of near-death experiencers
and would instead be similar to those of individuals who have no such
interest in NDEs.

  In this study, questionnaires were used to determine the reincarna
tion beliefs of a group of NDErs, a group of subjects who were interested
in near-death experiences but had not had an NDE, and also a group of
subjects who were chosen to represent the general non-experiencer,
AMBER D. WELLS  19

non-interest population. Interviews of NDErs were also conducted to
gain a deeper insight into the origins and structure of their beliefs
concerning reincarnation.

                                      Method

Subjects

  There were four separate subject groups employed in this study. The
first group, the near-death experiencer interview group (or NDEI
group) consisted of 14 near-death experiencers currently residing in the
state of Connecticut who were selected from among Ring's files and
from individuals who attended Friends of LANDS (International Asso
ciation for Near-Death Studies) meetings that convene monthly in
Farmington, Connecticut. The second group, the near-death experi
encer (NDE) group, consisted of 43 near-death experiencers from var
ious locations throughout the United States who responded to a mailed
questionnaire regarding their beliefs about reincarnation. These indi
viduals were also selected from among Ring's files. The third group was
composed of 34 individuals who have not had a near-death experience,
but who indicated an interest in the near-death phenomenon through
correspondence with Ring at the University of Connecticut. This group
also responded to the mailed reincarnation beliefs questionnaire and
will be referred to as the interest group. The fourth and final group
consisted of 30 individuals who were approached outside a grocery
store in Willimantic, Connecticut, and who agreed to fill out the rein
carnation beliefs questionnaire. This group will be referred to as the
control group.

Materials

  A questionnaire consisting of 16 statements about reincarnation was
developed specifically for this study to evaluate respondents' degree of
belief in reincarnation. The questionnaires were mailed with a cover
letter explaining the nature of the study and requesting the individ
ual's participation was included. The interview schedule used with the
NDEI group consisted of questions referring to NDErs' beliefs about
reincarnation and the factors that shaped their beliefs (see Appendix).
A tape recorder and cassette tapes were used to tape the interviews.
20  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

Three of the interviews were not tape recorded because the situation,
usually too much background noise, prevented it. These interviews
were recorded using paper and pen.

Procedure

  Fifty questionnaires were mailed to the near-death experiencer
group, of which 29 were returned; while 50 questionnaires were mailed
to the near-death interest group, of which 34 were returned.

  In addition, 30 individuals who were approached outside a grocery
store in Willimantic, Connecticut, agreed to respond to the reincarna
tion beliefs questionnaire. These subjects were told that I was a student
at the University of Connecticut conducting my honors' thesis on the
subject of reincarnation, and were asked to fill out a questionnaire
regarding their reincarnation beliefs.

  The questionnaire consisted of eight statements favorable to the idea
of reincarnation and eight statements unfavorable to it, and was de
signed using a Likert format. The subjects were asked to respond to
each statement with a +2 to indicate strong agreement with the
statement, a +1 to indicate a tendency toward agreement, a 0 to
indicate no opinion, a -1 to indicate a tendency toward disagreement,
and a -2 to indicate strong disagreement.

  Finally, 14 near-death experiencers from the NDEI group were con
tacted by phone and interviews were arranged. In the course of each
interview, the subject was asked to fill out the reincarnation beliefs
questionnaire. Because the NDEI group's mean reincarnation beliefs
score did not differ significantly from that of the NDEr questionnaire
only group (t= 1.62, df= 13; p <0.2), these two groups were combined for
the purpose of questionnaire analysis, and are referred to as the NDEr
group.

  Each subject was then assigned a reincarnation belief score from -32
to +32 by subtracting the sum of their responses against reincarnation
from the sum of their responses that were pro-reincarnation. A score of
+32 meant that the subject had responded with a +2 to all of the
statements considered favorable toward the idea of reincarnation and
with a -2 to all of the statements considered unfavorable to the idea
and thus constitutes a perfect pro-reincarnation score. A -32 consti
tutes a perfect score in the other direction. A constant of +32 was then
added to each subject's raw score, resulting in scores ranging from 0 to
64.
AMBER D. WELLS  21

Analysis

  A one-way analysis of variance including Scheffe's post-hoc test was
performed on the questionnaire data in addition to a chi-squared test.
The interviews were analyzed to answer these questions: How do near
death experiencers feel about reincarnation? Were there any common
alities among their beliefs? Have their beliefs changed since their
experience? And if so, what factors led to these changes-was it the
experience itself or life changes that took place following the experi
ence? The last two questions of the interview directly addressed this
issue.

                                      Results

Questionnaire Data

  The mean reincarnation belief score for the NDErs was 46.19; for the
NDE interest group the mean was 46.94; and for the non-interest
control the mean was 33.09.

  An analysis of variance revealed that there was a significant differ
ence among the reincarnation belief scores of the three groups (F=9.79;
df=2, 109; p <..01). Further statistical analysis with Scheffe's post-hoc
test indicated that no significant difference existed between the rein
carnation belief scores of the NDErs and the NDE interest group
(F=0.03; df=2, 109). However, a significant difference was found be
tween the scores of the non-interest control group and both the near
death experience and the near-death interest groups (F=7.60; df=2,
109; p<.01 and F=7.67; df=2, 109; p<.01 respectively).

  The range of possible scores from 0 to 64 was divided into thirds, with
scores from 0 to 21 representing strong belief that reincarnation does
not occur, scores from 22 to 42 representing neutral beliefs, and scores
from 43 to 64 representing strong belief in reincarnation. Table 1
shows a breakdown of scores of the three study groups into these three
categories. Seventy percent of these NDErs and 71 percent of the NDE
interest group indicated a strong belief in reincarnation, while only 30
percent of the control group did so.

  A chi-squared test of these data revealed that the reincarnation
belief scores for the NDE group and the NDE interest group were
significantly more positive than that of the non-interest control group,
whose scores tended to fall in the neutral region (chi-squared=78.15;
22                          JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

df=4; p <.005). Percentages of subjects in each group who expressed
agreement with each statement are listed in Table 2.

Interview Data

  NDErs' Belief in Reincarnation. A review of my interview data
revealed that 13 of the 14 NDErs either believed in reincarnation or
were at least open to the idea. Seven of the NDErs I interviewed did not
believe in reincarnation before their experience, but did believe in it
afterwards. Four individuals did not believe in reincarnation before
their NDE or afterwards. However, although these respondents did not
definitely believe in reincarnation, they were at least open to the
possibility. Two individuals had considered reincarnation prior to their
NDE, but the experience led them to change the way they looked at it;
one subject now believed in reincarnation on more of a collective level
rather than as an individual process, and the other came to think about
reincarnation more seriously and consider it more in depth following
his experience. One subject did not believe in reincarnation before her
NDE, and the experience had no effect on her views.

  No strong common pattern of beliefs about the process or purpose of
reincarnation surfaced in my interviews. However, a few common
alities were seen in some of the respondents' answers. No one claimed

                                           Table 1
      Belief in reincarnation of NDErs, NDE interest group,

                                  and control group

                    NDErs   Interest  Control     Total
                    (N=43)   group     group   (N=107)
                            (N=34)    (N=30)

Strong belief in    30      24        9        63
reincarnation
(score = 43-64)     8       9         15       32

Neutral belief
(score = 22-42)

Strong belief that  5       1         6        12
reincarnation does
not occur
(score = 0-21)
       AMBER D. WELLS                                                                                                                                                                  23

                                           o Co                       tm tM                00                                                                 c t-           0 0C
                                           LO        CO               CO            CO
                                                                                           LO4                                                                1O~            COs

( oMC        .2       ,a II                N-                         LO C                 C(M                                                                     o
                                                                                    t
            a)                                                        CO                   r-1                                                                [
           4a
            .)        Co M
             O
                                           0         C EO                           CO     OD                                                                 COt            C"4
             -
                                                                                                                                                          .a),a          a)
          PC                                                                                                 '14 ca4 a)
                                                                                                                                                                         0
            0                                              "a)"0              0
                    )                                                                                                                                                 .C.
          po                                                          a)

       cq                                         O                           vo        w

           a                                               0O                           0                                                                  a

                ".M4               o 0-a                                                  o                                                                                  02a)
              04                                                                                                                                           02
                                   "0             o        a)"            ~ ...
            ba00                                                                                                                                                         -0
            ab)                                                                        C)                                                                  Qa
                                                                                      a)
                                                                                                                                                           1- o
                                   o           a                a         a)
                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                   c- .a)                  ~ a) a                       co
                                           o                                            Q00 c4                                                                    :I
                                   o,"toi  R   02          ', 4 -,c-:00d --J*4 14C
                                                                                        .0                                                                                      .-
                                   a)             o a)i e
                                                                                              a)a                                                          .a)
                                   NZ $                         ei                           .2
                                                                                                                                                           02.. - 2-3 0o.
                                   is                      o+      '          e

                                   a)O o                        .             y

                            t3

                            L.                                                                                                                                        $0. P4

                                                  029 N' E            a

                                                                                                                                                              Flo            c

                                           *O 0 c               %3m                          Po- O+
                                                                                        i6 CO [
                                                     -9* 6      -,.*

                            C0so)                                                                                                                                                   6

                                   T- 4        G           Ci:            'U                                                                                  0c0 o;
24                                                  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

         o II                     GV                 V CD       0                              I 10 I

        S II                CO 00 O- COO J ICOD tVoO I>

             yo                                                 0 t - L4 140                                       CEO r--

         L CO

                      C ..

                      .-      '.ia                   a)e                              :'                    o

                          oo                 a                                            V                        O

    ao

                 bo                                  4

    0                                                      o                                                O

    eq           V            C                 L          o $..u.Q=                                            0

                                                                P- .4

    a)                        .-       W        ..   Q                                C cU
                                                                                                               UO
                                       .-

    PC

                 r.4              4ca                      a)                                     a)

                            1.4 CEC4.4 W v~          o                                         4                   '.

                                                                . C o +e

                                                                . a 0*

                                                                                   +

                                       aa)

                            a)a)             C404'0U                                                  0 CD6

                                                     0o -          a)

                      09            ~4                                                    e

                 0 a) 0                                    O s:08

        l)                             oa

                                  4 o           E          .3 .:                                         Cb~ .

                                                              a)M                                 a) C4     %

                      a) v             "                   .4.                            g~.

                                                                                          U)

        Cz            ci +                      Old

        co
        0)

                              C1                     C6    r -4                       61                    C
                                                               Y~Y4                    r-4                  -4
                              r-                      -
AMBER D. WELLS  25

to have gained any direct understanding of the nature or process of
reincarnation during his or her NDE. Three of the 14 respondents,
however, claimed a "sense" or "perception" during their experience of
having lived before. Only one respondent claimed to have had a past
lives review, in which she re-experienced events from a past life, during
an NDE.

  The Nature of Reincarnation. In response to the question about the
general process of reincarnation, four respondents mentioned one con
sciousness separating into individual souls to be embodied in matter.
One respondent took this idea further, to state that reincarnation takes
place more on a collective rather than an individual level. In other
words, she felt that a collective energy recycles itself through matter
and that our sense of individuality is a product of our present incarna
tion only. One respondent believed that a higher power created a finite
number of individual souls, some of which then are placed in human
embodiments in order to learn lessons.

  A strong minority of respondents, six of 14, saw individual choice as
the initiating force behind the reincarnation process. Three other indi
viduals mentioned karmic patterns or ties to other souls as influencing
the reincarnation process.

  Eight of 14 subjects mentioned learning or enlightenment as the
main purpose underlying reincarnation. One respondent said, "The
spirit needs to embody itself in matter to experience it and learn. There
are karmic patterns to learn lessons and to work spirit in matter."
Another commented, "Life itself is a series of leanings. The lessons are
universal, the two most important being truth and forgiveness."

  Ten of 14 interviewees believed it is possible to remember past lives,
while two remained unsure and one saw claims of past life re
membrances as most likely the result of fantasy.

  Eleven of 14 subjects believed in the concept of karma or at least were
open to it. Five of the 11, however, qualified their affirmation with
further explanation of their beliefs:

      Yes, but not in that sense. We progress at our own rate to reach the
      light. If you do things that take you away from the light, then you are
      perpetuating your time here.

      [I] don't believe in karma as some people do-that it is pre-destiny. We
      have karma but we can change it.
26  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

      Karma is misunderstood; it's not just negative. Everything is karma,
      even thoughts.

      Consequences carry over to some degree, but the emphasis is not so
      much on the physical act, but more on what is going on inside.

      Definitely, but there are no rights or wrongs-it just is. We all have
      light and dark and we need to balance them out.

When asked what goes on during the period between incarnations,
seven subjects mentioned learning as the main activity of the soul.
Four mentioned resting, rejuvenation, and/or connecting with God, and
one subject indicated that individuals are involved in setting up the
circumstances of their next life during this time. When asked if one's
personal awareness and sense of personal identity remained intact in
the afterlife realm and for how long, two subjects answered affir
matively, one believing that the personality would continue forever
and the other unsure as to how long this sense of "self' would remain.

  The majority of respondents, however, eight out of 14, gave more
qualified endorsements of this proposition. Here are three examples of
their responses:

      Not intact. The inner quality is there, the inner self remains, but the
      external aspect that may have seemed very strong is dissolved.

      Individuality wasn't the same there. I was the same as everybody and
      everybody was me.

      Your spirit is always you. You are not the personality that you are on
      earth. In the other realm you are everything, light is everything.

  Finally, eight of the 14 respondents said that they felt the cycle of
reincarnation would eventually come to an end. They indicated that at
this point there would be existence as pure spiritual being and/or a
merging with God. One respondent said, "Then you exist as pure
spiritual form, as a pure spiritual being." Another responded, "You
become an integral part of God. When everyone reaches that point it is
nirvana." Two of 14 subjects indicated that the cycle of reincarnation
would probably come to an end for earthly embodiments, but that one
would continue to incarnate into other realms or dimensions.
AMBER D. WELLS  27

  Factors Underlying the Shift Toward Belief in Reincarnation. A
more definite pattern emerged in the subjects' responses to the ques
tion about which factors led to the change in their reincarnation
beliefs. Three causes for changes in beliefs in a direction favorable to
reincarnation were mentioned.

  One cause for this belief shift, for which I found only limited evidence
in this study, is direct knowledge imparted during the NDE itself.
Three of my 14 interview subjects claimed to have a "sense" that they
had lived before during their NDE. For two of my subjects this factor
would qualify as the main event influencing their reincarnation be
liefs. One subject, however, had several NDEs and also exhibited a
significant psychic awakening, involving direct information concern
ing reincarnation, following her experiences. She claimed to have had a
past-lives review during one NDE, but did not indicate which one.
Therefore, I do not know which came first: the direct reincarnation
knowledge through her psychic awakening, or the past-lives review.
Thus, I do not know for certain which was the influencing factor in her
belief shift. However, because her post-NDE experiences were so many,
so extensive, and obviously so influential in her beliefs, it is more likely
these experiences, rather than her NDE past-lives review, that shaped
her beliefs, and she is consequently categorized as such.

  The second cause for the reincarnation shift was found in events
taking place after the NDErs' experience that seemed to be part of a
general psychic awakening. This general psychic awakening has been
documented by other researchers as well (Greyson, 1983; Ring, 1985).
Ring presented this idea as his "spiritual catalyst" hypothesis, which
implies that NDEs tend to lead to psychic development. For five of the
14 subjects in this study it was this psychic awakening following their
NDE, rather than the experience itself, that provided them with direct
knowledge of reincarnation. One subject explained:

      Before any of these events, I call mine kind of a two-part event,
      because I had the NDE in 1979, and then another car accident in 1985
      that brought about what I call a kundalini awakening, which is
      similar to an NDE without the death part of the physical body. So,
      what happened to me is, before either of these experiences happened I
      didn't believe in reincarnation at all.... After these experiences what
      one of the things that happened to me was I started getting memories
      of my own past lives. A lot of times just spontaneously something
      would trigger it and I'd get this memory, and I see visions, and then I
      started getting them of other people's lives.

Two other experiencers noted similar phenomena:
28  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

      This didn't come about from the experience but afterwards, since then.
      [I've received] messages, my brother-in-law [deceased] had a mes
      sage ... that his soul would be reincarnated into my sister's son.

      I had ongoing experiences after the near-death experience. In that
      after process I experienced souls. On one occasion it's like I followed a
      soul, went through a process with a soul, in how they were reborn, how
      it came about that they were reborn.

  Finally, as the third source of the reincarnation belief shift, the NDE
opened the individual up to greater possibilities in his or her percep
tion of reality. It made them more willing to explore a wider range of
spiritual possibilities, including reincarnation. This exploration was
manifest in the form of reading, discussions with others, and personal
reflection. Six of my 14 subjects fell into this category. One respondent
said of her NDE: "It opened up a dimension that I never really knew
existed." Another commented: "It [his NDE] didn't help me conclude
anything, it just threw the doors of possibility wide open." Still another
said:

      I didn't even know what reincarnation was before I had an NDE. It
      was afterwards that I was led to find out what it was. Some of the
      things I'm telling you [about reincarnation] came out in other conver
      sations and some in the reading that I've done, and some just thoughts
      I've had. And it made total sense to me.

And finally one woman I interviewed said:

      [I] hadn't given it [reincarnation] much thought before that [her NDE].
      I was brought up in a fairly conventional religion-Catholicism. I was
      not a particularly practicing Catholic at the time, but more or less
      hadn't explored much Eastern philosophy. After the experience, I did. I
     read a great deal of different philosophies, not just Eastern, but all of
      them, and found that it [reincarnation] was plausible.

                                    Discussion

  In this study, 70 percent of the sample of NDErs demonstrated belief
in reincarnation. In contrast, a Gallup Poll (Gallup and Proctor, 1982)
found that only 23 percent of the general population endorse this belief,
while 30 percent of my control group help views favorable to reincarna
tion. These data confirm the findings of earlier studies with respect to
AMBER D. WELLS  29

NDErs' reincarnation beliefs. While I found that the near-death experi
encer group exhibited a significantly greater tendency toward belief in
reincarnation than my general public sample, I also found that my
NDE interest group exhibited beliefs that did not differ significantly
from those of the NDErs. These data are consistent with the hypothesis
that there is nothing inherent in the near-death experience itself that
causes the shift in experiencers' beliefs about reincarnation.

  Additionally, my data failed to reveal any consistent pattern among

"truth" NDErs' beliefs about the purpose or process of reincarnation. There

were, as I already noted, many similarities, but no one
emerged. Furthermore, the beliefs expressed by the NDErs in my study
are not unique; they tended to follow the standard view of reincarna
tion as expressed in much of the New Age literature. By way of exam
ple, the following excerpts taken from Irving S. Cooper's book, Reincar
nation.: A Hope of the World (1979), are representative of this view and
are quite similar to many of the statements made by my NDEI sample:

      The chief purpose of reincarnation is education. To this end we are
      born again and again on earth, not because of any external pressure,
      but because we, as souls, desire to grow. (p. 14)

      It is a universal process, and prevails not only in the human kingdom
     but throughout the whole of nature. Whenever we find a living form,
      the consciousness of that form is also evolving, using temporarily for
      that purpose the physical form in order that it may gain physical
      experience. (p. 19)

      In each incarnation we have a different physical body, a different
      name, and may have different souls acting as parents, but these
      changes do not in the slightest imperil our individuality. (p. 24)

      Reincarnation is not an endless process, and when we have learned
      the lessons taught in the World-School we return no more to physical
     incarnation unless we come back of our own accord to act as Teachers
      of humanity or as Helpers in the glorious plan of evolution. (p. 47)

  With respect to the question of what in fact underlies the reincarna
tion belief shift, I can offer three possibilities suggested by my data, but
which would require further research to verify. First, in some cases, it
does seem to be the NDE itself that influences one's reincarnation
views. Although I did not find extensive evidence for this in my study,
it has been documented by other researchers (Morse and Perry, 1992;
Ring, 1985). In those cases, individuals claimed to have received direct
30  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

knowledge of reincarnation during the NDE itself. An example of this
type of knowledge can be seen in a letter written to Ring by John
Robinson:

      It is a matter of personal knowledge from what the Being with whom I
      spoke during my NDE told me about my older son, that he had had 14
      incarnations in female physical bodies previous to the life he has just
     had.

Ring has also heard testimony of this kind of direct knowledge in some
of his interviews. One NDEr, whose account is recorded in Ring's
audiotape archives, commented:

      My whole life went before me of things I have done and haven't done,
      but not just of this one lifetime, but of all the lifetimes. I know for a fact
      there is reincarnation. This is an absolute. I was shown all those lives
      and how I had overcome some of the things I had done in other lives.
      There was still some things to be corrected.

Another NDEr whose testimony is included in Ring's audiotape ar
chives gave this account:

      I had a lot of questions, and I wanted to know what they [light beings
      she encountered in her NDE] were doing-why are you just kind of
      milling around here? And someone stepped forward ... it wasn't just
      one ... I got information from a number of them ... that they were all
      waiting for reincarnation.

Additionally, in a case documented by Melvin Morse, a girl who had
her NDE when she nearly drowned at the age of 7 reported seeing
during her experience two adults waiting to be reborn (Morse, 1983).

  Second, some NDErs may gain direct knowledge of reincarnation
through other psychic or mystical experiences following their NDE. In
this way, the NDE becomes a catalyst for openness to reincarnation
through its ability to propel the experiencer into a general psychic
awakening.

  Finally, for other NDErs their experience serves mainly to spark
their interest in various "New Age" phenomena that leads to often
extensive outside reading and research. It makes sense that when one
becomes open to the idea of life after death, the idea of life after life
becomes much more plausible.
AMBER D. WELLS                                                       31

  The fact that my NDE interest group exhibited reincarnation belief
scores so similar to those of my NDE sample can be explained by two
hypotheses. First, it is possible that some of my NDE interest subjects
may have gained direct knowledge of reincarnation through other
psychic or mystical experiences even though they have not had an
NDE. Second, my NDE interest group may be very similar to those in
my NDE sample who were prompted to explore "New Age" material
following their experience. Both groups became interested in the near
death phenomenon, one group through direct experience and the other
through unspecified means, and thus were led to explore the concept of
reincarnation. My study is limited by the fact that I have no data on
the factors influencing the beliefs of the subjects in the NDE interest
group.

  Future research would be well directed towards determining what it
is about an interest in near-death experiences that promotes an open
ness to reincarnation, or if in fact both the interest in NDEs and
openness to reincarnation are the result of some other factor or occur
rence. Using a larger, more randomly assigned subject pool would also
help to strengthen the findings.

                          References

Atwater, P. M. H. (1988). Coming back to life: The after-effects of the near-death

   experience New York, NY: Dodd, Mead.

Cooper, I. S. (1979). Reincarnation: A hope of the world. Wheaton, IL: The

 transformation osophical Publishing House.       and the near-death

Flynn, C. P. (1986). After the beyond: Human
experience Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Gallup, G., Jr., and Proctor, W. (1982). Adventures in immortality: A look

beyond the threshold of death. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

Grey, M. (1985). Return from death: An exploration of the near-death experience

London, England: Arkana.

Greyson, . (1983). Increase in psychic phenomena following near-death experi

ences. Theta, 11, 26-29.

Morse, M. L. (1983). A near-death experience in a 7-year-old child. American

Journal of Diseases of Children, 137, 959-961.

Morse, M. L., and Perry, P. (1992).'Transformed by the light: The powerful effect

of near-death experiences on people's lives. New York, NY: Villard.

Ring, K. (1980). Life at death: A scientific investigation of the near-death experi

ence New York: NY: Coward, McCann and Geoghegan.

Ring, K. (1984). Heading toward omega: In search of the meaning of the near

   death experience New York: NY: Morrow.

Ring, K. (1992). The Omega Project- Near-death experiences, UFO encounters,
and mind at large New York, NY: Morrow.
32  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

Sutherland, Cherie. (1992). Transformed by the light. Life after near-death
   experiences. New York, NY: Bantam.

Twemlow, S. W., Gabbard, G. 0., and Jones, F. C. (1982). The out-of-body

   experience: A phenomenological typology based on questionnaire response.
  American Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 450-455.

                                     Appendix

              Interview schedule for NDE and Reincarnation Study

   In this interview, I'd like to ask you some questions about your beliefs
concerning reincarnation-the idea that we live more than one life in a
physical body.

  First, however, I'd like to ask you whether your own near-death
experience gave you any insights into this matter of reincarnation. Did
anything in your NDE itself touch on this question, and if so, what
exactly was it? [Pause for answer]

   Some people say that during their NDE they had a "life review" in
which various events of their life are seen again, usually in a very vivid
way. A few people, however, say that they seem to see events from their
"past lives" as well. Did this kind of "past lives" review happen to you
during your NDE? [If yes, as respondent to elaborate]

   Sometimes people say that during their NDE they were given a kind
of direct understanding of the general process of reincarnation. Did
anything like this happen to your during your NDE? [If yes, ask
respondent to elaborate]

   Occasionally, near-death experiencers report that during their NDE
they appeared to see "souls waiting to be reborn". Did you glimpse
anything like this? [If yes, ask respondent to elaborate]

   OK, in this next part of the interview, I'd like to ask you some
questions having to do with your views about reincarnation. If you
yourself believe in reincarnation, or are inclined to, or are even open to
the possibility that reincarnation might be true, I have one set of
questions I'd like to ask you. If, however, you do not believe in reincar
nation or have never given much thought to it, then I have another set
for you. Which set of questions would be appropriate for you? [Wait for
AMBER D. WELLS  33

respondent to clarify his/her status. If respondent is not a believer in
reincarnation or hasn't thought about it, give him/her the Reincarna
tion Questionnaire to fill out. In that case, simply wait for that to be
done before concluding the interview by asking respondent the last set
of questions concerning changes in his/her views about reincarnation
since his/her NDE]

  [Interview continues thus for respondents who are open to or believe
in reincarnation]

  My first question is a very general one: (1) In your view, what is the
process of reincarnation? In short, how does it work? [For this and all
questions that follow in this series, allow plenty of time for respondent
to elaborate, and encourage further elaboration if necessary]

  (2) What initiates the process that leads the individual to reincarnate
into another body?

  (3) Does the individual have a choice about whether to reincarnate? If
so, what factors affect that choice? Does anyone outside the individual
guide the individual here?

  (4) Why does a person reincarnate? That is, is there a general purpose
that underlies reincarnation? Or does it differ from individual to
individual?

  (5) In your view, does an individual about to reincarnate choose his/
her parents, the general circumstances of his/her life, etc., or is that
determined by factors outside the person's own control?

  (6) When does the person's soul enter the body? Does this vary?
  (7) Once "in", can the soul occasionally "go out" again at or around the
time of birth?
  (8) Some people claim to be able to remember past lives. Do you think
this is possible?
  (9) Do you believe in the concept of karma-the idea that whatever we
do has consequences, and that these consequences can carry over from
one life to another? [If yes, then:] How does this tie in for you with the
concept of reincarnation?
  (10) When you die, what in general terms do you think happens
afterward?
  (11) If there is a period between lives, what goes on during that
interval?
  (12) Do you think that there is any kind of a "life review and assess
ment" during this interval? [If so, then:] How is it related, if at all, to
one's eventual next life?
34  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

  (13) Does the individual's personal awareness and sense of personal
identity remain intact in the afterlife realm? For how long?

   (14) What happens to that personality after the individual begins the
process of reincarnation? Does it in some sense continue to exist or does
it simply cease as an independent entity?

   (15) Does the cycle of reincarnation for a given individual ever come
to an end? [If yes, then:] What brings it to an end? What happens to the
individual then?

   Thank you for taking the time to answer all these questions of mine.
Before we conclude this interview, though, I have just a few more
things to ask you about reincarnation.

   The first is very straightforward and won't take you long. I have a
brief questionnaire that I'd like you to fill out for me now. It simply lists
a series of statements about reincarnation and asks you merely to
indicate whether you agree or disagree with these statements. It will
just take a few more minutes of your time. [Give respondent question
naire, and wait for him/her to finish]

   My last set of questions- and there are just a few of them-have to do
with some of the factors that may have shaped your beliefs about
reincarnation. [These questions are to be asked of both the believers in
reincarnation and those who indicated at the beginning of the inter
view that they did not believe in reincarnation or hadn't thought about
it]

   First, have your views about reincarnation changed since your NDE?
[If yes, then:] How so, and what brought about these changes? Do you
think it was the experience itself or was it the result of life changes
after the experience? For example, new religions you may have ex
plored, groups you've joined, workshops you've taken, books you've
read, etc.? [Have respondent elaborate freely, and follow up to clarify
the sources which have influenced the respondent's beliefs and under
standing about reincarnation]

   Well, that concludes my interview, [respondent's name]. Thank you so
much again for taking the time to answer my questions so
thoughtfully. Now, can I answer any questions for you about my pro
ject? [Engage the respondent as much as he/she would care to concern
ing the research, what has been learned so far, etc.]
