Guest Editorial 

A  New  Perspective  on  the 
Afterlife  Issue 

V.  Krishnan 

Kaloor, India 

ABSTRACT:  The  claim that  human  beings  survive  death  as conscious  entities 
is  untenable  on  logical  and  empirical  grounds.  However,  I  suggest  that  a  re
cording  may  persist  of  some  aspects  of  one's  life,  of  which  some  people  may 
become  aware  under  certain  circumstances. 
pretation  of phenomena  believed  to be  afterlife-related  is  plausible  in  terms of 
current  scientific  knowledge.  

I  examine  whether  this  inter

KEY  WORDS:  reincarnation;  survival.  

The  belief  that  life  continues  after  death  in  some  form  or  other  is 
ancient  and  widespread.  But  the  question  of  whether  there  is  any 
substance  to  that belief remains  unsettled,  despite  years of debate  and 
inquiry.  The purpose  of this paper  is to point out  that certain  facts  that 
have  emerged  from  recent  research  can  help  answer  that  question.  
The  belief in  survival  rests  mainly  on  the  assumption  that  there  is,  in 
each  human  being,  a  discrete  entity  that  is  the  source  of  life  and,  as 
such,  can remain  intact forever,  unlike  the body.  This discrete  entity is 
called  the  soul or spirit in many  cultures.  

There  are  serious  problems  with  this  view.  For  example,  its  adher
ents  have  no  verifiable  answer  to  the  question  of how  the  soul  comes 
into  existence,  a  fact  that  is  admitted  by  thinking  theologians  them
selves  (for  example,  Moore,  1966).  Another  unresolved  puzzle  is  why 
the  soul  is postulated  as  necessary  to  induce  life,  as what  develops  into 
a child  is  not  inert  at  any  stage  of its  existence.  

V.  Krishnan  has  earned  degrees  in  the  humanities  and  civil  engineering  and  writes 
about  various  scholarly  subjects,  most  recently  on  new  interpretations  of  Hindu 
metaphysical  concepts.  Reprint  requests  should  be  addressed 
to  Mr.  Krishnan  at 
Ramakrishna  Sevasram  (Room  No.  11),  Azad  Road,  Kaloor,  Kochi  682017,  India.

Journal of Near-Death  Studies,  22(1),  Fall 2003 

2003  LANDS

5

6

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

Yet  another  problem  is  the  claim  that  the  soul,  unlike  any  other 
object  known  to  us,  does  not  ever  break  up  into  its  constituents  and 
change  into  other  entities,  a  process  commonly  described  as  death, 
perishability,  disintegration,  and so  on.  This postulated  difference  be
tween  the  soul  and  other  known  objects  implies  that there  are  two 
different  orders  of  stuff:  one  perishable  and  one  imperishable.  This 
implication  contradicts  the  verifiable  fact  that  the  universe,  in  the 
sense  of all that is,  is  monistic.  As  I have  pointed  out  previously  in this 
Journal (Krishnan,  1996),  the  reason  why  there  cannot  be  more  than 
one  order of  stuff is  this:  No  object  can  be  destroyed  totally,  no  matter 
what  processes  we  subject  it  to;  it  will  only  undergo  change  in  vari
ous  respects,  such  as  shape,  size,  color,  molecular  structure, and so  on.  
One  of  the  several  implications  of  this  fact  is  that  there  has  never 
been  a time  without  something  (one  or more  objects)  in  existence,  and 
everything  that  existed  at  any  time  in  the  past  or  exists  now  must 
have  arisen  from  pre-existing  things.  This  means  that all  the  entities 
there  are,  animate  or  inanimate,  are  all  interrelated  and  have  some
thing  in  common.  That is,  there  is  only  one  order  of  stuff  and  that 
differences  that we  perceive  between  objects  are  to  be  understood  as 
differences  in  respect  of  properties.  

It  is  apparent  from  the  foregoing  discussion  that  there  are  no 
verifiable  answers  to  questions  concerning  the  genesis,  purpose,  and 
composition  of  the  postulated  soul.  We  may  therefore  conclude  that 
there  is  no  such  entity  and,  consequently,  no  life  after  death.  What 
are  we  then  to  make  of  the  claim  that  there  are  many  phenomena 
suggestive  of an afterlife? Are  they  all  some  kind  of mental  fabrication, 
such  as hallucination,  or plain lies?  The  fact is  that some  cases  fall  into 
these  categories  and  some  do  not,  as  we  can  see  from  any  standard 
work  on  survival  research  (for  example,  Jacobson,  1974).  We  can  get 
hints  about  how  to  interpret  the  latter  kind-those  that  are  not 
fabrications-from  the  systematic  and  painstaking studies  conducted 
by  Ian  Stevenson  and  his  associates  of  reports  of  small  children  in 
various  countries  remembering  that  they  had  lived  as  another  per
son  before  their birth.  In  some  countries,  particularly  Eastern,  such 
children  are  regarded  as  reincarnations  of  persons  whose  lives  they 
recall.  Stevenson,  however,  cautiously  terms  these  instances  cases 
of the reincarnation type,  leaving  those  studying  his findings  to  decide 
for  themselves  whether  or  not  reincarnation  is  the  best  explanation 
for them  (Stevenson,  1987).  (I  have  cited  only  one  of Stevenson's  many 
works,  as  it  contains  a  comprehensive  account  of  his  major  findings 
about  the  reincarnation issue.)

V.  KRISHNAN

7

A  brief explanation  of the  concept  of reincarnation  will  be  useful  to 
those  who  are  not  familiar  with  it.  Reincarnation  refers  to  the  belief 
that  there  is  in  every  human  being  an  entity  that  separates  from  the 
body  at  death,  carrying  his  or her  memories,  skills,  aptitudes,  and  so 
on,  which  distinguishes  one  person  from  another  and  can therefore  be 
said  to  constitute  his  or  her  personality  and,  after  a  variable  inter
val,  unites  with  a  child,  before  or  after  its  birth.  In  a  typical  case 
investigated  by  Stevenson,  the  child  begins  to  refer,  usually  between 
the  ages  of  2  and  5  years,  by  word  or  gesture,  to  persons,  places,  and 
events  connected  with  its  previous  life.  Full  recollection  is  rare.  The 
behavior  of  the  child  (the subject  of a  case  of the  reincarnation  type) 
nearly  always  conforms  to  that  of  the  person  whose  life  he  or  she 
remembers  (the  previous personality).  In  some  cases  the  subject  is 
found  to have  a congenital  deformity  or a  birthmark  that corresponds 
in  appearance  and  location  to  a  wound  from  which  its  previous  per
sonality  died.  A  few  subjects  are  found  to  suffer  from  an  internal 
disease,  such  as  tuberculosis,  that  the  pervious  personality  suffered 
from,  but  from  which  members  of their  new  family  have  been  free.  
Finally,  and  most  importantly,  the  child  exhibits  a  feeling  of identity 
with  the  previous  personality  and  an  emotionally-laden  connection 
with  that  person's  family.  This  feeling  of identity  with  the  previous 
personality  is a feature common  to all the  cases that have  been  verified 
satisfactorily.  The  other  features  are  not  equally  prominent  in  all 
cases.  Before  proceeding  further,  I  would  like  to  make  it  clear  that 
the  conclusions  I  have  drawn  from  Stevenson's  studies  and  others  are 
entirely  my  own  and  I  alone  am  responsible  for  any  shortcomings  in 
them.  

One  of  Stevenson's  findings  is  that  the  subjects  of  cases  of  the 
reincarnation  type  are  not born just anywhere.  In  a number  of cases  it 
was  noticed  that  they  were born  near  the previous  personalities'  place 
of  death  (Stevenson,  1987).  Instances  of  the  subject's  birth  far  from 
this  area  are  not,  however,  uncommon.  A  significant  fact  about  many 
of  these  cases  involving  geographical  distance  is  that  they  occurred 
under  one  or  the  other  of the  following  circumstances:  One  of the  par
ents  of the  subject,  who  lived  far  from  the  place  where  the  previous 
personality  had  died,  passed  through  it just  before  or  soon  after  the 
conception  of  the  subject;  or  the  body  of  the  previous  personality  had 
been  moved  from  where  he or  she  was believed  to have  died  to  another 
place  (Stevenson,  1987).  It  is  clear  from  these  findings  that  when  a 
person  dies,  a  factor  carrying  some  elements  of his  or her  personality 
persists  in the  death-related  area  and  becomes  associated  with  a  child

8

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

at  some  stage  of  its  development  in  such  a  way  that  these  elements 
become  part  of its  memories.  

Another  finding  that should  be  noted  in  this  connection  is  that a  few 
subjects  spoke  of  events  that  they  felt  to  have  taken  place  between 
their  birth  and  the  death  of  their  previous  personalities.  I  shall  cite 
two  examples.  One  child  said  that  she  was  in  a  realm  where  the 
clothes  were  rich  and elegant,  and  they  needed  no  washing.  There  was 
no  need  to  eat;  however,  food  appeared  before  you  whenever  you 
wished  for  it.  The  girl  met a  kindly  "ruler"  who  suggested  to her  to  get 
reborn,  but  did  not  tell  her  where  (Stevenson,  1987).  Another  child, 
a boy  aged  about  3  years,  recalled  a car  accident  in  which  the  previous 
personality  was  involved.  The  impact  of the  crash  threw  the  pervious 
personality  from  the  car  and  he  died  "almost  instantly"  from  a  broken 
neck.  The  ambulance  taking  his  body  went  over  a  bridge  near  the 
accident  site  (Stevenson,  1987).  

The  resemblance  of  these  accounts 

to  near-death  experiences 
(NDEs)  is  unmistakable  (although  Stevenson  did  not  describe  them 
as  NDEs).  The  first  example  is  reminiscent  of otherworldly  NDEs  and 
the  second  of  an  out-of-body  experience  (OBE).  Now  these  children 
could  not  have  known  about  their  previous  personalities'  NDEs  from 
any  living  person  or  through  any  other  normal  means,  because  their 
previous  personalities  died  and  did  not  live  to  speak  of  them.  Some 
commentators  on  reincarnation  have  invoked  extrasensory  perception 
(ESP)  to  account  for  these  and  other  kinds  of  rebirth  memories  (for 
example,  Chari,  1962);  but  ESP,  even  if it  does  occur,  does  not  help 
explain  the  kind  of experience  cited  here  because  the  children  had 
not  been  born  at  the  time  the  NDEs  occurred.  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  simplest  and  best  explanation  is  that  an  entity  separated  from 
the  body  at  death  bearing  what  constitutes  personality,  in  the  sense 
mentioned  above,  and  remained  attached  to  some  object  in  the  death
related  location  until  it became  associated  with  a  human  host.  

I  think  that  these  two  findings  provide  the  strongest  evidence  yet 
in  support  of  the  belief  in  a  surviving  factor.  The  next  question  to 
consider  is  whether  the  surviving  element  is  a  living  entity.  If it  is, 
we  can  be  certain  that  there  is  an  afterlife.  Unfortunately,  it  is  not 
possible  to  answer  the  question  conclusively  because  there  is  no  pre
cise  definition  of what  life  is,  or  what  the  signs  of life  are.  For  exam
ple,  a  biochemist  might  say  that  only  an  object  that  is  able  to  feed, 
to  be  alive  (for  exam
reproduce,  and  mutate  can  be  considered 
ple,  Oparin,  1957);  while  a  philosopher  might  insist  that  conscious
ness is  the  chief sign  of life  (Ducasse,  1961).  There  is  even  a  view  that

V.  KRISHNAN

9

no  clear  dividing  line  exists  between  life  and  nonlife  (for  example, 
Beck,  1961).  

Another  problem  is  that  we  cannot  be  sure  whether  our  notions 
about  signs  of  life,  which  are  based  on  embodied  beings,  apply  to 
a  surviving  entity  that  is  without  a  body  like  ours.  We  can  therefore 
decide  whether  an  entity  is  animate  or  not  only  in  terms  of  what  we 
know  about  ourselves.  If  a  person  is  able  to  sense  what  is  happening 
around  him  or  her  in  a  measurable  way,  he  or  she  is  said  to  be  alive.  
I  can judge  the  surviving  factor  only  on  this  basis.  

As  noted  above,  there  is  a  variable  interval  between  death  and 
rebirth.  Stevenson  found  that  this  period  was  a  "complete  blank" 
in  the  memories  of  most  of  his  subjects  (1987,  p.  109).  That  is,  they 
had  no  recollection  of  matters  such  as  where  they  remained  in  the 
discarnate  state  during  the  interval,  any  physical  changes  that  may 
have  occurred  in  the  vicinity  where  their  death  occurred,  what  the 
surviving  factor  looked  like,  how  it  left  the  dead  person's  body  and 
united  with another  person,  and  so  on-matters  that one  would  expect 
a  sentient  entity  to  register  and  recall  fully  or  partially.  I  would 
therefore  suggest  that,  on  present  evidence,  what  survives  is  not  a 
living,  conscious  being.  Some  subjects  have  expressed  their  dis
satisfaction  with  their  birth  in  families  inferior  in  social  and/or  eco
nomic  status  compared  to  their  status  in  a  previous  life;  further, 
instances  of  rebirth  of  members  of  hostile  tribes  in  enemy  territory 
have been  reported  (Stevenson,  1987).  Such  cases  also  seem  to suggest 
that the  surviving  entity  is  not  a  conscious  being  capable  of choosing 
its future  parents.  

If the surviving factor  is not a living entity  and yet carries  some of the 
thoughts  and  such  subjective  activity  of a  deceased  person,  what  is  it? 
The  answer  is  obvious  to  me:  it  can  only  be  a  recording  of  mental 
activity.  There  are  also  findings  that  suggest  what  is  likely  to  be  re
corded.  For  example,  most  children  recalled  only  events  "of  the  last 
year,  month,  and  days  of  the  life  remembered"  (Stevenson,  1987, 
p.  107).  Stevenson  further  noted:  "Recency  of  association  with  the 
person  or object  (on  the  part of  the  previous  personality  before  death) 
appears  more  important  than  length  of association  in influencing  the 
subject's  memories"  (1987,  p.  108).  Further,  there  is  some  indication 
that  the  subject  may  remember  only  very  little  of the  previous  per
sonality's life if the latter was suffering from poor memory at the time of 
his  or her  death  (Stevenson,  1987).  It  is  worth  noting  here  that,  apart 
from  OBEs  and  otherworldly  NDEs,  some  subjects  have  reported 
experiencing  what  in  the  NDE  literature  is  called  a  life  review  or

10

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

panoramic memory-a sudden,  quick,  and  brief imaged  recollection  of 
events  of life-just  before  dying in  the  previous  life  (Stevenson,  1987).  
I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  infer  from  these  findings  that  the  subject 
remembers  only what actually  went through the  previous  personality's 
mind  at  the  time  of  his  or  her  death.  In  short,  what  survives  is 
a  recording  of  what  a  dying  person  happens  to  think  of.  Since  this 
provides some information  about him or her, we  might  also describe  the 
surviving factor  as  a record  of information  about  a  deceased  person.  

I  shall  now  consider  whether  there  are  experimentally  proven  facts 
that support  my interpretation  of the surviving  element.  Such  findings 
should  confirm  that (1) some  factor having  information  capacity  leaves 
the  body  at  death,  (2)  that  factor  can  persist  in  the  physical  en
vironment  for  some  time  carrying  the  information  it  holds,  and  (3) 
a  person  can  interact  with  it  in  such  a  way  that  he  or  she  becomes 
aware,  consciously  or  subliminally,  of the  information  it  carries.  

There 

is  evidence  that  all  living  organisms  emit  low-intensity 

light  (bioluminescence)  and  at  the  time  of  death  this  electromag
netic  radiation  is  ten  to  10,000  times  stronger  (necrotic radiation). It 
is  already  known  that  this  electromagnetic  radiation  holds  simple 
kinds  of information  such  as  the  rate  of dying.  Recent  research,  how
ever,  suggests  that  it  may  have  a  much  larger  information  capacity 
(Slawinski,  1987a,  1987b).  In other words,  when  a person  dies,  an elec
tromagnetic  radiation  may  occur  that  can  carry  some  information 
about  him or her.  It is yet to be  confirmed  whether  this radiation  holds 
the  kind of information  that subjects  of cases of the  reincarnation  type 
recall;  but  it is  conceivable  that  it  may,  on  the  basis  of recent  studies 
of  the  mind/body  relationship,  which  indicate  that  our  thoughts, 
emotions,  and  mental  phenomena  are  accompanied  by  characteristic 
brainwave  patterns  (Hutchinson,  1991;  Ornstein,  1972).  That  is,  a 
thought,  for  instance,  is  the  manner  in  which  we  experience,  or  is the 
experiential  aspect  of,  a  certain  brainwave  pattern,  just  as  a  color  is 
the  way  we  experience  electromagnetic  radiation  of  a  certain  wave
length  (Krishnan,  1994).  It is then  possible  that the  necrotic  radiation 
may  be  modulated  by the  brainwave  patterns  of a  dying  person.  

As  for  the  other  points,  there  are  positive  hints  from  studies  con
cerning  allergic  reactions.  For  example,  it  has  been  found  that  water 
has a "memory" for frequencies  of electromagnetic  fields to which  it has 
been  exposed,  and  some  people  may  react  to  the  memory  of  those 
frequencies  if they come  to  the  neighborhood  of the  container  in which 
such  treated  water  is  kept  (Smith  and  Best,  1989).  This  renders 
theoretically  sound  my proposal that (1)  the surviving factor  is a record

V.  KRISHNAN

11

of information,  such  as an  energetic  radiation;  (2)  it may  remain  apart 
from  the  body  of a  dead  person,  attached  to  an  animate  or  inanimate 
entity;  and  (3)  a  living  person  may  become  aware  of  it  under  certain 
circumstances.  Other  writers  have  already  suggested  that  sighting  of 
ghosts  could  be  explained  along  these  lines  (Lethbridge,  1961;  Smith 
and  Best,  1989).  

In  light  of the  above  discussion,  we  may  conclude  that  surviving 
records  of information  about  a dead  person  may  explain  not only  cases 
of the  reincarnation  type  but also  other  phenomena  that  are  said  to be 
afterlife-related  and  found  not to  be  mental  fabrications  or fraudulent.  
However,  it  should  not  be  assumed  that  the  mechanism  underlying 
them-the  manner  in which  the  record  of information  comes  about-is 
identical  for  all  afterlife-related  phenomena,  as  there  are  consider
able differences  among  them. For example,  the apparition  of a  dead per
son  is  said  to  be  visible,  apparently  projected  out  into  space,  whereas 
a  rebirth  subject  appears  to  experience  events  as  imaged  memories, 
that  is,  as  visual  images  in  the  mind  (Stevenson,  1987).  Subjects  in 
a  reincarnation-type  case  feel  a  sense  of  identity  with  the  previous 
personality,  while  subjects  of apparitional  experiences  do  not  feel  the 
same  way  about  the  dead  person.  

Such  differences  suggest  that  different  mechanisms  are  at  work.  
This  is  one  of  the  matters  to  be  studied  in  the  future.  Some  of  the 
others  are  added  below,  from  which  it  can  be  seen  that  a  multidisci
plinary effort may be  necessary  to find adequate  answers.  There  are no 
verifiable  reports  of  multiple  rebirths,  that  is,  more  than  one  child 
recalling events  from  the life  of the  same  deceased  person.  Even  in  the 
case  of identical  (one-egg)  twins,  either  both  children recalled  different 
previous  lives,  or  only  one  of  them  remembered  a  previous  life.  This 
characteristic  indicates  that  the  surviving  element  in  cases  of  the 
reincarnation  type  does  not  split  up  between  more  than  one  child  or 
inanimate  environmental  host.  In  other  words,  it joins  its  host  in  its 
entirety.  There  is  another  finding  worth  noting  in  this  connection: 
I  mentioned  above  that  the  surviving  entity  may  remain  localized  in 
a  particular  area.  That  finding  suggests  that if the  surviving  factor  is 
a form  of energy,  it does not  propagate  in all directions  like the  carrier 
waves  from  a  radio  broadcasting  station,  but  rather  than  it  radiates 
unidirectionally  like  a  single  photon  or  a  highly  coherent  laser  beam.  
What  are  the  implications  of these  features? 

Why  is  it that  the  surviving  element  influences  the  memory  only  of 
a  child  but  not  of its  parents  or  other adults?  What is  the  factor  in  an 
animate  or inanimate  entity that  attracts  the  surviving  element?  How

12

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

does  the  surviving  element  remain  associated  with  an  inanimate  or 
nonhuman  host  for  long  periods? 

Because  there  is  no  verified  instance  of  a  rebirth  subject  bearing 
physical  resemblance  to  the  previous  personality  who  is not  a  relative, 
the  surviving  entity  seems  to  have  no  role  in  shaping  the  appearance 
of the  subject.  However,  it  does  seem  to  have  some  influence  on  the 
body  in  other,  presently  unknown,  ways.  For  example,  some  subjects 
are  found  to  have  a  birthmark  or  physical  deformity  corresponding  to 
the  location  of a  wound  from  which  the  previous  personality  died;  the 
scar  from  a  long-healed  wound  or  a  birthmark  may be  carried  from  one 
life  to  another;  and  some  subjects  are  noticed  to  have  been  prone  to 
certain  internal  diseases  like  tuberculosis  when  the  previous  person
ality  had  suffered  from  them  (Stevenson,  1987).  What  is  the  ex
planation  for  this  influence? 

I  hope  I  have  been  able  to  show  that a  new  approach  to  the  afterlife 

issue  is  both  necessary  and  possible.  My  interpretation  of  afterlife
related  phenomena  is  based  on  the  verifiable  fact  that  the  universe  is 
monistic  and  the  corollary  that  all  phenomena  should  therefore  be 
explicable  in terms of interaction  of entities  belonging  to a  single  order 
of  reality,  or  stuff.  I  have  also  pointed  out  some  of  the  gaps  in  my 
interpretation  that  need  to  be  filled  in.  That  effort  could  contribute 
to  other  fields  of  inquiry,  just  as  Stevenson's  rebirth  studies  have 
contributed  to  our  understanding  of  certain  unsolved  problems  in 
psychology,  biology,  and medicine  (Stevenson,  1987).  Finally,  I  believe 
that the  realization  that we live  only  once, that there  is nothing  to look 
forward  to  beyond  death,  will  prompt  us  to  live  in  harmony  with  one 
another  and  our  environment,  and  make  the  best  of  our  life  here  on 
this  beautiful  planet  Earth.  

References 

Beck,  W.  S.  (1961).  Modern  science  and the  nature of life.  Harmondsworth,  England: 

Penguin  Books.  

Chari, C.  T.  K.  (1962).  Paranormal  cognition,  survival,  and  reincarnation.  Journal of the 

American Society for  Psychical Research, 56,  158-183.  

Ducasse,  C.  J.  (1961).  The belief in a life  after death.  Springfield,  IL:  Charles  C  Thomas.  
Hutchinson,  M.  (1991).  Megabrain (rev.  ed.).  New  York,  NY:  Ballantine.  
Jacobson,  N.  O.  (1974).  Life  without death? New  York,  NY:  Dell.  
Krishnan, V.  (1994).  On the mind/body  problem  [Letter].  Journal of Near-Death Studies, 

13,  137-138.  

Krishnan,  V.  (1996).  Misidentified  flying  objects  [Letter].  Journal of Near-Death Studies, 

14,  287-290.

V.  KRISHNAN 

13 

Lethbridge,  T.  C.  (1961).  Ghost and ghoul.  London, England:  Routledge  and  Kegan  Paul.  
Moore,  E.  G.  (1966).  Survival: A  reconsideration. London,  England:  Society  for  Psychical 

Research.  

Oparin,  A.  I.  (1957).  The  origin of life  on  the  earth.  Edinburgh,  Scotland:  Oliver  and 

Boyd.  

Ornstein,  J.  H.  (1972).  The mind and the  brain. The  Hague,  The  Netherlands:  Martinus 

Nijhoff.  

Slawinski,  J.  (1987a).  Electromagnetic  radiation  and  the  afterlife.  Journal of  Near

Death Studies,  6,  79-94.  

Slawinski,  J.  (1987b).  Response  to  commentaries  on  "Electromagnetic  radiation  and  the 

afterlife."  Journal of Near-Death Studies,  6,  127-133.  

Smith,  C.  W.,  and  Best,  S.  (1989).  Electromagnetic man.  London,  England:  J.  M.  Dent.  
Stevenson,  I.  (1987).  Children  who  remember  previous  lives.  Charlottesville,  VA: 

University  Press of Virginia.

