Cases of the Reincarnation Type with
Memories from the Intermission
Between Lives

Poonam Sharma, B.A.
Jim B. Tucker, M.D.

   University of Virginia

ABSTRACT: For the last 40 years, researchers have collected cases of children
who claim to remember previous lives. In a minority of these cases, the
subjects also claim to remember events that took place during the intermission
between the end of their previous life and their birth in the current life.
Subjects in these cases tend to make more verified statements about the
previous life they claim to remember than do other subjects of reincarnation
type cases, and they tend to recall more names from that life. Analysis of
reports from 35 Burmese subjects indicates that the intermission memories
can be broken down into three parts: a transitional stage, a stable stage in
a particular location, and a return stage involving choosing parents or
conception. A comparison of these reports to reports of near-death experi
ences (NDEs) indicates that they show features similar to the transcenden
tal component of Western NDEs and have significant areas of overlap with
Asian NDEs.

KEY WORDS: reincarnation, near-death experiences.

   At the University of Virginia Division of Personality Studies,
researchers have for the last 40 years collected cases of children who
claim to remember previous lives (Stevenson, 2001). These cases of the
reincarnation type (CORT) typically involve children who report

   Poonam Sharma, B.A., is a medical student, and Jim B. Tucker, M.D., is Assistant
Professor of Psychiatric Medicine, at the University of Virginia School of Medicine. This
study was supported in part by a grant from the Society for Psychical Research. Reprint
requests should be addressed to Dr. Tucker at the Division of Personality Studies,
University of Virginia Health System. P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152;
e-mail: jbt8n@virginia.edu.

Journalof Near-Death Studies, 23(2), Winter 2004 2004 LANDS  101
102  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

memories of a recent life at a very early age, usually beginning around
the age of 2 or 3 years and ending by the age of 6 or 7. The memories
they report sometimes involve the life of a family member or an
acquaintance. In other cases, however, children have described the life
of a stranger in another location, and people have then verified that an
individual died whose life matched the description given by the child.
We refer to that individual as the previous personality.

   These cases often include other features in addition to the child's
statements about a previous life. A number of children have been born
with birthmarks or birth defects that corresponded to wounds, usually
fatal ones, suffered by the previous personality, and many of the
children show behaviors that seem related to the previous life, such as
phobias related to the mode of death or repetitious play mimicking the
previous personality's occupation.

   In a minority of the cases, the children have reported memories of
events that took place between the death of the previous individual and
their own birth. These cases of the reincarnationtype with intermission
memories, which we will refer to as CORT-I, are the focus of this paper.

                     Statistical Analysis of CORT-I

    More than 2500 CORT from around the world are now registered in
our files, and 1200 of them have been entered into a computerized data
base using SPSS for Windows, Version 12.0. In 276 of these, the subject
has claimed to remember not only a past life, but also a time between
lives, an intermission memory. These intermission memories are coded
into four categories: claimed memories of the previous personality's
funeral, memories of other terrestrial events, memories of an existence
in another realm, and memories of conception or of being reborn.

    Analyses were performed on the entire collection of CORT that have
been entered into the computerized database with the exclusion of
cases from Burma (also known as Myanmar). Coding of the Burmese
CORT into the database is incomplete, with some cases being chosen
because of the presence of intermission memories, so they are not
a representative sample useful for statistical analysis. The countries
in which the coding has been completed include Eastern countries
such as India, Sri Lanka, Turkey, and Lebanon, along with the United
States and Canada, and using cases from all countries except for
Burma resulted in 1107 cases, with 217 of them having intermission
memories. For the analysis, the number of cases varied for each item
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER                    103

                              Table I
Memory of Subjects and Strength of Cases in

                  CORT-I Versus CORT

                               CORT-I CORT  t  df  p

Number of verified statements   9.07  4.92 -5.04 776 <.001
Names from previous life        3.48
Number of lives recalled        1.37  2.89 -2.34 670 .020
SOCS score                     15.7
                                      1.02 -3.15 141 .002

                                      9.7   -8.23 1054 <.001

based on the number of cases with the relevant data recorded. We used
chi-square tests and independent t-tests to analyze these data, with
a significance level of p = .05.

   Table 1 compares CORT-I subjects with other CORT subjects on
items related to past-life memories. CORT-I subjects made signifi
cantly more statements about the previous life that were verified to be
accurate than their CORT counterparts. They remembered more
names from the previous life, in addition to the name of the previous
personality. They also tended to recall a larger number of past lives.
Based on Pearson chi-square tests, CORT-I subjects were significantly
more likely to state the name or nickname of the previous personality

(x2 = 9.549, df = 1, p = .049) and to claim to remember the mode of

death (x2 = 5.388, df = 1, p = .020). While our database does not
indicate specifically whether the names the subjects gave were
accurate, the statements by the CORT-I subjects about the mode of
death were much more likely to be independently verified than those
of other subjects (x2 = 23.229, df= 1, p < .001), and in those cases, 84
percent of their reports of the death were either accurate in most
details (74 percent) or totally accurate (10 percent).

   The CORT-I were also stronger than other CORT based on
a Strength-of-Case Scale (SOCS) that assigns points according to four
categories of factors: (1) birthmarks or birth defects on the subject that
correspond to wounds on the previous personality, (2) verified
statements by the subject ' about the previous life, (3) unusual
behaviors related to the previous life, and (4) distance between the
previous personality and the family of the subject (Tucker, 2000). The
mean SOCS score was 15.7 for CORT-I and 9.7 for CORT.

    Other features of the cases failed to differentiate CORT-I subjects
from CORT subjects. There were no differences in gender of the
subjects: 58 percent of the CORT-I subjects were male, as were 63
104                                JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

                                     Table II
     Characteristics of CORT-I Versus CORT Subjects

                            CORT-I CORT   t       df  p

Age subject first spoke     22.69  22.54  -0.16   693 .872
   (in months)                     35.84    0.60  917 .549
                            34.07
Age subject first                  0.93   0.42 1022 .681
   communicated about        0.84
   past life (in months)     0.60  0.23 -1.16     958 .247
                             201
Number of birthmarks               255    0.41    460 .68
Number of birth defects
Distance between previous

   personality and subject
   (in kilometers)

percent of other CORT subjects (x2 =1.959, df=1, p = .162). As shown
in Table 2, there were also no significant differences in the age when
the children first spoke, the age when they first communicated about
a past life, the number of birthmarks, the number of birth defects, and
the distance between the previous personality and the subject. The
mean distances shown in Table 2 (201 kilometers for cases with
intermission memories and 255 kilometers for other cases) are skewed
by a small number of extremely-long-distance cases. The median
distances were 20 kilometers for cases with intermission memories
and 14 kilometers for other cases.

   Similarly, as shown in Table 3, chi-square tests indicated no
significant differences in the behaviors of CORT-I subjects and other
CORT subjects. The one exception was that subjects who reported
intermission memories were less likely to express memories of the
previous life in their play, but that difference lost statistical
significance when the Bonferroni correction was used to correct for
multiple simultaneous statistical tests on related data.

   Lastly, we analyzed characteristics of the previous personality with
chi-square tests, as shown in Table 4. These included characteristics
both of that individual while living and of his or her death, and none of
them had a significant effect on whether the subject in the case later
reported intermission memories. The database has information on
some of these items for only a small numbers of cases, reducing the
power of the tests to detect a significant change, but none of the tests
for those items came close to approaching significance.
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER             105

                           Table III
Behaviors of CORT-I Versus CORT Subjects

                            Nx2         df  p

Unusual maturity            661  1.633  3   .652

Adult attitude              658  1.626  3   .804

Unusual dietary cravings    615  6.024  3   .110

related to previous life

Unusual desire for alcohol  310  7.414  3   .060

or tobacco

Unusual philias related to  495  3.784  3   .286

previous life

Unusual phobias related to  808  3.408  3   .333

previous life

Memories of previous life   539  4.359  1   .037

expressed in play

Display of emotion during   659  0.191  3   .979

recall of previous life

Personality change during   577  0.793  3   .851

recall of previous life

   To summarize, these results indicate that only an unusually strong
memory, and not any other characteristic of the subject or previous
personality, distinguishes CORT-I subjects from other CORT subjects.
The CORT-I subjects not only claim to have memories of the
intermission between the deaths of the previous personality and their
own births, but they also demonstrate more ability to recall a variety
of memories from the past life. CORT-I subjects are more likely to
state a name for the previous personality, names of other individuals
from the previous life, and the mode of death of the previous
personality, and they make significantly more statements about the
previous life that have been verified to be accurate. Along with the
highly significant differences in the SOCS scores, this indicates that
these cases warrant serious consideration.

                Analysis of Intermission Experiences

   While claimed memories of an intermission experience are rare in
some places, they appear to be relatively common in Burma. While the
incidence for all of the Burmese cases collected in our files is unknown,
106                             JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

                                       Table IV
          Characteristics of the Previous Personality in

                             CORT-I Versus CORT

                           Nx2          df                p

Mode of death              908  15.189  9                 .086

Unexpectedness of death    587  4.074   4                 .396

Was previous personality   33   2.159   4                 .707

a meditator?

Was previous personality   74   0.824   3                 .844

attached to wealth?

Was previous personality   106  3.264   4                 .659

a criminal?

Was previous personality   88   3.217   4                 .522

philanthropic/generous?

Was previous personality   145  4.418   4                 .352

religiously observant?

Was previous personality   68   3.241   4                 .518

saintly?

Did previous personality   107  6.917   5                 .227

have unfinished business?

Ian Stevenson (1983) determined that 52 out of 230 Burmese cases (23
percent) included such reports. In contrast, only 8 percent of the
Turkish cases include intermission reports, and only 2 percent of the
Lebanese cases have them. These cases were generally investigated
more than 20 years ago, and repeat studies would be needed to
ascertain if similar reports could be easily found today.

   We are currently in the process of coding Burmese CORT to be
entered into our database, and given the relatively common in
termission reports in them, we decided to analyze those reports in
depth as the cases were being coded. Analysis of 35 Burmese CORT-I
led to a new scheme for categorizing the intermission experiences that
subjects describe.

   First, some information about the Burmese culture will allow some
perspective on these cases. The prevalent religion is a combination of
long-ago imported Buddhism and native animism. Buddhism is the
more formal aspect, and it co-exists with a belief in nature spirits
(nats) who are thought to cause trouble unless regularly appeased
with gifts and displays of respect. While Buddhism predicts changes in
fortune over lifetimes according to accumulated karma, the existence
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER  107

of nats is invoked to explain more day-to-day misfortunes, and belief in
them is widespread (Nash, Obeyesekere, Ames, Ingersoll, Pfanner,
Nash, Moerman, Ebihara, and Yalman, 1966; Spiro, 1978). The
religious background of Burma may contribute to the increased
reports of intermission memories or to the specifics of those reports.

Development of a Composite Temporal Scheme

   Categorizing CORT-I intermission memories is fraught with pitfalls.
Accounts of intermission experiences vary, and no two accounts are
identical. There are, however, recurring themes, events, and chronol
ogies. Keeping these points in mind, we developed a three-stage
temporal scheme to describe the intermission experience and to provide
a starting point for further analysis. It describes the typical chronolog
ical progression of CORT-I in Burma and highlights the characteristic
events and themes of each stage. Not all three stages were experienced
by all subjects, and a few subjects described typical characteristics of
a particular stage either earlier or later than would be expected by the
progression described below. Nevertheless, the described format suited
the majority of the cases and serves as a preliminary categorization plan
suitable as a stepping-stone for further analysis.

   Stage 1. The first stage could be named the "transitional stage."
Nine of 35 Burmese intermission subjects recalled characteristics
typical of this period. While interview notes rarely document any
references by subjects to their emotional state during the intermission
period, the events recalled during the transitional stage would often
seem uncomfortable or unpleasant to the Western reader. The events
and characters described are associated with the previous life.
Subjects may see the preparation of the previous personality's body
or the funeral or try to contact grieving relatives, only to find they are
unable to communicate with the living. One subject said he did not
realize he was dead. Several reported being driven away by the
weeping of their relatives, an experience that one subject said made
him "hot." This stage often ends as the subject is directed by an elder
or an old man dressed in white to a place where he or she then stays
for the bulk of the intermission experience.

    Stage 2. The second stage is characterized by its marked stability
compared to the other two stages. Subjects report living in a particular
location or having a schedule or duties to which they must attend. Of
the 35 cases so far analyzed, 19 had reports typical of the second stage.
108  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

Nine reported staying in a tree, four in a pagoda, and two remained
near the place of death. Reports of seeing or interacting with other
discarnate personalities are common (seven subjects). Subjects report
varying degrees of comfort during this period. One subject reported
being abused by other spirits who threw objects at him, and having to
walk long distances. Another woman reported not being able to leave
the site where she had buried her jewelry in life, but said that she was
far more beautiful as a discarnate and had pretty dresses of gold.
Another woman, however, who is very poor in her current life,
reported that all her needs were taken care of as a discarnate and that
her experience was "quite pleasant."

   Stage 3. The final stage is one of choosing parents for the next life or
of conception. Eighteen of 35 subjects reported characteristics of this
stage. Seven reported following the future parents home, apparently
on their own initiative, as the parents passed by while performing
everyday tasks, such as bathing or returning home from work. Five
more reported being directed to the present parents, often by elders or
the old man figure referred to in stage 1. Nine commented on how they
gained entrance to the mother's body. This was most often by
transforming into a grain of rice or speck of dust in the water and
being ingested by the mother. A few went to considerable lengths,
having to try repeatedly when either they were rebuffed by guardian
spirits or the water was thrown out as dirty.

    Preliminary comparison suggests that this scheme is applicable not
only to Burmese CORT-I but to CORT-I internationally. Stevenson
(1983) reported the case of Bongkuch Promsin from Thailand, who
claimed that, after the death of his previous personality, he lived in
a tree for seven years (stage 2) and then followed his current father
home on a bus (stage 3). Thai monk Chaokhun Rajsuthajarn reported
attending the funeral of the previous personality (stage 1) and trying
to interact with the guests, only to realize that he was invisible to
them (Stevenson, 1983). Purnima Ekanayake of Sri Lanka reported
seeing people crying at her funeral (stage 1) and going to the light to
come to her new family (stage 3) (Haraldsson, 2000). Sam Taylor (an
unpublished American case from our files) reported that God gave him
a card with green arrows to come back from heaven (stage 3). While
the specific imagery may be culture-specific, preliminary study
 suggests that the phases seem to be universally applicable. The
further study into the details of international CORT-I required to
refine this assertion remains to be done.
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER  109

   Comparison of CORT-I with Near-Death Experiences

   The recurring thematic elements of CORT-I, particularly the visions
of other beings and suggestions of being in another realm, bring to
mind accounts of near-death experiences (NDEs). This thematic
overlap deserves exploration. An initial comparison was undertaken
by application of two NDE scales, the Weighted Core Experience Index
(WCEI) (Ring, 1980) and the Near-Death Experience Scale (Greyson,
1983), to the composite temporal scheme outlined above. Some
differences in accounts should be expected, since NDErs obviously
return to life or continue living, while people who report intermission
memories claim to recall a period after they had permanently lost
a life. Furthermore, the WCEI and the NDE Scale were developed
using accounts from very different cultural surroundings than the
CORT-I. This being the case, we explored the differences between
NDEs (as outlined in the two scales) and CORT-I using an
international review of NDEs and studies of NDEs in Burma's
neighbors, India and Thailand.

Comparison of Composite CORT-I with the WCEI

   The WCEI consists of 10 items that are weighted differentially to
produce a measure of the depth of an NDE, as outlined in Table 5. It
starts with "a subjective sense of being dead" experienced by all 35 of
the Burmese CORT-I used for analysis (1 point). The second item,
"feeling of peace, painlessness, etc.," was described by only two
subjects (one saying, "I was quite happy" and the other stating a more
ambiguous, "It appeared to be a very pleasant life"). In fact, more
common were statements of discomfort, especially around weeping
relatives ("the relatives started weeping. ... I could not bear it"; "We
felt very hot if any of our relatives wept for us. ... We would have to
flee"; "Weeping scares away discarnates").

   Nor did any of the Burmese CORT-I analyzed clearly report the next
item, "sense of bodily separation." Some reported watching their
funeral (apparently not from the perspective of the body), being able to
change form, or not having to eat - characteristics suggestive of a lack
of bodily sensation or limitations. However, many (10 subjects)
described the clothes they were wearing, usually the clothes of
the deceased. The mention of clothes, particularly the clothes of the
110                              JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

                                         Table V
                   The WCEI and CORT-I Experiences

        WCEI Item             Weight  Commonly Reported by
                                          CORT-I Subjects

Subjective sense of being     1       Yes

dead                                  No

Feeling of peace,             2       No (?)
                                      No
painlessness, etc.
                                      Yes
Sense of bodily separation    2
                                      No
Sense of entering a dark      2       No

region                                No
                                      No
Encountering a                3       Yes

presence/hearing a voice

Taking stock of one's life    3

Seeing, or being enveloped    2

in, light

Seeing beautiful colors       1

Entering into the light       4

Encountering visible spirits  3

deceased, makes this an ambiguous area of overlap. Based on the
descriptions of their actions, however, the subjects seemed to
remember being separate from their physical bodies even if they did
not immediately recognize it or explicitly state it.

   The next item, "sense of entering a dark region," was not reported.
Many (nine subjects) did report the next item, however, "encountering
a presence/hearing a voice" (3 points). This presence was referred as an
old man in white, and elder, the Authority, Hades, or the Guardian. The
presence usually offered guidance through a period of transition. Only
one case reported "taking stock of one's life" (chided by "Hades" for not
performing a particular religious ceremony) and none reported either
"seeing, or being enveloped in, light," "seeing beautiful colors," or
"entering into the light." The last feature, "encountering visible spirits"
(3 points), was frequently referred to (14 cases). The fact that these
spirits as well as the subject were referred to as "discarnates" lends
further support to a "sense of bodily separation" mentioned earlier.

   Many CORT-I accounts include the three features of a subjective
sense of being dead, encountering a presence, and encountering visible
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER                       111

                         Table VI
The NDE Scale and CORT-I Experiences

NDE Scale Item                                Commonly Reported
                                              by CORT-I Subjects

Cognitive component:                          No
   Time distortion                            No
   Acceleration of thoughts                   No (?)
   Life review                                No
   Sudden understanding
                                              Rare
Affective component:                          No
   Peace, pleasantness                        No
   Joy                                        No
   Cosmic unity
   Seeing or feeling surrounded by light      No
                                              No
Paranormal component:                         No
                                              No (?)
   Senses more vivid than usual
   Extrasensory perception                    Yes
   Precognitive visions                       Yes
   Out-of-body experience                     Yes
                                              No
Transcendental component:

   Entering an unearthly world or dimension
   Encountering a mystical being or presence
   Seeing deceased or religious spirits
   Border or point of no return

spirits, which would score a 7 on the WCEI, falling into Ring's category
of a "moderate experience." Inclusion of "a sense of bodily separation"
would push the composite temporal experience into the "deep
experience" category. Clearly, this is enough to indicate a similarity
between the reports of the two experiences.

Comparison of Composite CORT-I with the NDE Scale

   While comparison to the WCEI establishes areas of overlap between
CORT-I and NDEs as a whole, comparison of CORT-I with the NDE
Scale highlights the contrasts between the two experiences (Table 6).
112  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

The questionnaire is divided into four categories with four questions
each. The categories highlight the cognitive, affective, paranormal,
and transcendental aspects of the NDE. This categorization of NDE
features allows a clearer picture of how NDEs and intermission
memories in CORT-I differ.

   None of the CORT-I subjects claimed a clear cognitive change as
a discarnate. Far from talking about an increase in the speed of time
(question 1), subjects who referred to. time reported definite time
periods with no reference to a change in the rate of time, such as, "I
was a discarnate for 7 days." No subjects reported a change in the
speed of thoughts (question 2). Two subjects made statements that, if
stretched, may indicate past scenes coming back to them (question 3).
One said that Hades chided her for not performing a religious
ceremony. Another said that spirits were shown places where they had
lived and asked if they yearned for those earthly places. None of the 35
cases claimed to experience a universal understanding (question 4).

   Comparison of CORT-I with the affective component of the question
naire reveals even more differences. Only 2 of the 35 cases, as discussed
before, suggested a feeling of peace or pleasantness (question 5), while
several reported uncomfortable experiences. None suggested a feeling of
joy (question 6) or a feeling of harmony or unity with the universe
(question 7), or saw or felt surrounded by a brilliant light (question 8).

   Similarly, comparison with the four paranormal questions brings
out few similarities. No CORT-I subjects reported a heightening of
senses (question 9), although one reported an ability to see auras
during his time as a discarnate. None reported a sense of awareness of
things going on elsewhere (question 10). None reported scenes from
the future (question 11). And none clearly stated feeling separated
from their body (question 12).

   The transcendental aspect of the questionnaire displays dramati
cally different results. Reports of another realm were common
(question 13). As discussed earlier, many encountered a mystical being
or presence, such as an old man in white, Hades, or the Guardian
(question 14). Many (14 subjects) also referred to deceased spirits they
saw during their period as a discarnate (question 15). None reported
coming to a border or point of no return, perhaps not surprisingly since
they claimed to have passed on to death and not returned to life.

   To summarize, both NDEs as defined by the WCEI and CORT-I
include a sense of being dead, encountering a presence (often referred to
as an old man in white in CORT-I) and encountering visible spirits
(other discarnates or deceased relatives). Comparison with the NDE
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER  113

Scale highlights the relative lack of reports of cognitive, affective, or
paranormal aspects to the death experience described by CORT-I
subjects, and the sizable overlap in transcendental aspects of the two
experiences.

Comparison of Composite CORT-I with InternationalNDEs

   Both the WCEI and NDE Scale were developed from American
accounts of NDEs. The few comparisons of NDEs from Hindu and
Buddhist cultures suggest there are definite cross-cultural variations
(Murphy, 2001; Pasricha and Stevenson, 1986; Pasricha, 1995). Thus,
the discrepancies between NDEs and CORT-I described so far may be
due to the application of Western standards to a Burmese sample.
Ideally, CORT-I studied in Burma with would be compared to NDE
accounts of Burmese subjects, but since no study of Burmese NDEs has
yet been undertaken, we will use the few works on international NDEs
as a serviceable proxy to review the remaining differences between NDE
accounts and the experiences recalled by CORT-I subjects.

   Allan Kellehear (1993) reviewed published reports of NDEs from
China, India, Western New Britain, Guam, Native North America,
Aboriginal Australia, and Maori New Zealand, with the number of
cases in some places being very small. After reviewing several elements
of NDEs widespread among Western cases (tunnel experience, out-of
body experience [OBE], life review, encounters with other beings, and
another world) he found the major cross-cultural features to be
encountering other beings and other worlds, two common character
istics of CORT-I. The tunnel experience, missing from CORT-I, was not
reported in any of the nonWestern NDEs that Kellehear reviewed,
though experiences of darkness were often present. Other features
present in several but not all cultures' NDEs were also present in
CORT-I. Out-of-body experiences, which were at least suggested in
CORT-I, were reported from India, Guam, Native North America, and
Maori New Zealand, but not from China or Aboriginal Australia and
probably not from Western New Britain. The life review present in one
CORT-I was reported in China, India, and probably Western New
Britain, but not from Guam, Native North America, Aboriginal
Australia, or Maori New Zealand. The only features that Kellehear
found in NDEs from all cultures - seeing other beings and other
realms - are readily apparent in CORT-I as well, and CORT-I may
resemble Western NDEs as much as do the NDEs of some other
cultures.
114  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

Indian NDEs and CORT-I

   Similar to Kellehear's results, Satwant Pasricha (1995) found both
similarities and differences between cross-cultural accounts of NDEs.
Both Indian and American subjects reported meeting dead relatives
and acquaintances, seeing beings of light or religious figures, being
revived through the thoughts of loved living persons, being sent back
from the other realm by a deceased loved one, and seeing their own
physical body while ostensibly dead. The fast two characteristics were
not found among North Indian cases and so may not be universal
characteristics. Being sent back by the thoughts or actions of loved
ones is not a criterion applicable to the study of CORT-I, since CORT-I
subjects claim not to have been sent back. The remaining two
characteristics, meeting deceased relatives and seeing beings of light
or religious figures, seem to correlate with CORT-I accounts.

   Pasricha also reported six characteristics of Indian NDEs that are
not seen in American NDEs. Four involve returning to life and are
therefore not relevant to CORT-I, but the other two are that the
subject was "taken to other realms by messengers or some one" and
then was "passed on to the man with a book" containing a list of deeds
or mistakes (Pasricha, 1995, p. 86). While the Burmese CORT-I
subjects did not report the latter, their reports of being directed to
a new place by an elder or an old man dressed in white at the end of
the transitional phase sound very similar to the former.

Thai NDEs and CORT-I

   Both India and Thailand border Burma, but Thailand appears to
have a more similar religious climate. While Burmese supernatural
ism has not permeated Thailand, Theravada Buddhism is the religion
of the overwhelming majority in both countries.

   Todd Murphy (2001) gathered a collection of ten NDE cases from
Thai popular literature. The reported imagery seemed to be very much
affected by the culture, though Murphy argued that it should actually
be considered a reflection of the individuals' expectations of what
death would be like rather than a reflection of their culture itself. The
themes he reported were Yamatoots (servants of the God of death,
Yama), the importance of merit accumulated during life, and the
presence of cases of mistaken identity.

   The appearance of the Yamatoots seemed to act in concert with
OBEs to convey to the subjects that they were deceased and separate
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER  115

from their bodies. Murphy noted that while OBEs might be found in
the NDEs of all cultures, some may not recognize them as a herald of
death, and thus, anthropomorphic harbingers of death such as
Yamatoots might be necessary to reinforce the awareness of death.
No correspondence to the Yamatoots is seen in the Burmese CORT-I,
but they are seen frequently in Indian NDEs (Pasricha and Stevenson,
1986). The Burmese reports are more suggestive of out-of-body
experiences like those of a typical Western NDE, even if the subjects
are not aware of separating from their bodies. Rather than being
explicitly told that they are dead, Burmese subjects seemed to figure it
out on their own, although a few subjects reported that it took them up
to 7 days to realize it.

   The second Thai characteristic, postmortem assessment of karma by
Yama, seems to be similar to a life review in Western NDEs, with some
significant differences. The Thai version involves either explicit
physical suffering as punishment for the accumulation of bad karma
(for example, being forced to go thirsty if the subject never offered
drinks to monks) or implied suffering in future lives (for example,
rebirth as a bird). Also, Murphy reported that some cases seemed to
assess the balance of good and bad done during life rather than the
moment-by-moment life review reported in Western NDEs. This type
of life review bears more similarity to Pasricha's account of Indian
NDEs, where messengers pass the subject on to a man with a book,
rather than the Western panoramic life review. It is hard to determine
from the one reported case of a life review in the Burmese CORT-I
studied which model would be a more appropriate description for
CORT-I generally. In that case, however, the subject reported being
chided by Hades for not performing a particular religious ceremony.
The reference to one specific lack and the explicit mention of a direct
reprimand suggest that in that case, the life review was more similar
to Asian NDEs in this regard.

    The third characteristic Murphy reported, cases of mistaken
identity, are also found in Indian cases but not in Western NDEs.
No reports of mistaken identity have been found in Burmese CORT-I,
perhaps unsurprisingly, since the subjects all died rather than getting
"sent back" in favor of the correct person. The universal features
pointed out by Kellehear and Pasricha and present in CORT-I are also
present in the Thai NDEs. For example, dead friends and relatives
were seen in four of Murphy's 10 cases.

    One of the most striking differences between Western NDEs and
Burmese CORT-I so far described is the significant lack of positive
116  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

affect so frequently described in the Western near-death experiences.
This positive affect also seems to be missing from Thai NDEs. Murphy
reported that while some subjects claimed to see heaven and feel
"pleasantness, comfort, a sense of beauty, and happiness," none
reported the "ineffable" experience so often relayed by NDErs in the
West. And just as common, Murphy reported, were reports of negative
affect. Five of his subjects reported seeing the tortures of hell, and the
reports of seeing heaven or hell are similar, in theme if not in specifics,
to reports of other realms described by CORT-I subjects.

   Lastly, Murphy reported an absence of the light and tunnels in Thai
NDEs. While both are common NDE images in the West, they seem to
be missing from both Thai NDEs and Burmese CORT-I.

                                       Conclusion

   Cases of the reincarnation type with intermission memories are
a striking phenomenon, but since the memories are usually unverifi
able, they have not been a significant focus of research up to this point.
The current analysis, however, suggests that they should be carefully
considered. Since the children who report such memories tend to make
more verified statements about the previous life they claim to remember
than do other subjects, and tend to recall more names from that life,
their reports of events from the intermission period seem to be part of
a pattern of a stronger memory for items preceding their current lives.

   An examination of the content of the intermission memories indicates
significant overlap with reports of NDEs. For the Western NDEs, this is
particularly true for the transcendental aspects of those reports. For
NDE reports from other parts of the world, the universal features of
NDEs are seen in the intermission descriptions, and the Burmese
intermission reports are similar, though not identical, to NDE reports
from neighboring India and Thailand. While the differences in the
reports should not be glossed over, the similarities indicate that the
intermission reports by children claiming to remember previous lives
may need to be considered as part of the same overall phenomenon
reports of the afterlife - that encompasses NDEs.

   If the intermission reports are part of an overall phenomenon, then
what do they reveal about that phenomenon? As with NDEs, the reports
show individual differences and contain features that seem to be at least
culturally connected, if not culturally driven. More universal themes,
POONAM SHARMA AND JIM B. TUCKER  117

however, appear to underlie those features. They include a recognition
of dying, either through an OBE or through a visit from a harbinger of
death. There is often then an experience with spirits or a visit to, or view
of, another realm. This is frequently followed by memories of returning
to life, either in a new body in the intermission cases or by reaching
a point of no return and turning back in the case of NDEs.

   While the latter two themes might be thought of as attempts to deny
the reality of death, the first can hardly be so. In fact, the argument
that NDErs create their fantasies of an afterlife as a defense against
the confrontation with death is weakened by the similar intermission
reports. The subjects in these cases are young children who have not
been close to death and in fact would not be thought able to
comprehend the concept of death; yet their reports bear many
similarities to NDE reports, thus posing a problem for psychological
explanations offered for NDEs. Likewise, the neurophysiological
explanations that have been offered cannot explain the similar reports
from healthy, young children.

   More work needs to be done with the intermission memory cases; in
particular, reports from various cultures need to be closely analyzed.
Further exploration of these cases may also provide additional insights
into phenomena such as NDEs.

                                       References

Greyson, B. (1983). The near death experience scale: Construction, reliability, and
   validity. Journalof Nervous and Mental Disease, 171, 369-375.

Haraldsson, E. (2000). Birthmarks and claims of previous-life memories: I. The case of
   Purnima Ekanayake. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 64, 16-25.

Kellehear, A. (1993). Culture, biology, and the near death experience: A reappraisal.
  Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 148-156.

Murphy, T. (2001). Near-death experiences in Thailand. Journal of Near-Death Studies,
   19, 161-178.

Nash, M., Obeyesekere, G., Ames, M. M., Ingersoll, J., Pfanner, D. E., Nash, J. C.,
   Moerman, M., Ebihara, M., and Yalman, N. (1966). Anthropological studies in
   Theravada Buddhism. New Haven, CT: Yale University.

Pasricha, S. (1995). Near death experiences in south India: A systematic survey. Journal
   of Scientific Exploration, 9, 79-88.

Pasricha, S., and Stevenson, I. (1986). Near death experiences in India: A preliminary
   report. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 174, 165-170.

Ring, K. (1980). Life at death: A scientific investigation of the near-death experience. New
   York, NY: Coward, McCann and Geoghegan.

Spiro, M. E. (1978). Burmese supernaturalism (expanded ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
   Institute for the Study of Human Issues.
118  JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

Stevenson, I. (1983). Cases of the reincarnation type, Vol. IV: Twelve cases in Thailand
   and Burma. Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.

Stevenson, I. (2001). Children who remember previous lives: a question of reincarnation
   (rev. ed.). Jefferson, NC: McFarland.

Tucker, J. B. (2000). A scale to measure the strength of children's claims of pre
   vious lives: Methodology and initial findings. Journal of Scientific Exploration, 14,
   571-581.
