Division  of the Self:  Life  After Death 
and the Binary Soul  Doctrine 

Peter Novak 

LaPorte, IN 

ABSTRACT:  Ancient  Egyptians  believed  that  each  individual  had  two  souls, 
a  ba and  a ka,  which  separated  at  death  unless  steps  were  taken  to  prevent 
this  division.  Egyptian  descriptions  of  the  ba  and  ka  are  strikingly  similar  to 
modern  scientists'  descriptions  of the  conscious  and  unconscious  halves  of the 
human psyche.  Many other cultures  all over  the globe  believed in two souls,  one 
like  the  conscious,  the  other  like  the  unconscious,  which  separated  at  death.  
Many  cultures  held  that one  soul  would  go  on to  reincarnate,  while  the  other 
would  become  trapped  in  a  dreamlike  netherworld.  Some  believed  that  this 
division could  be  prevented  or reversed,  while  others  saw  the  division  as being 
inevitable.  The  two  stages  of  near-death  experiences,  a  detached,  objective, 
and  dispassionate  "black void"  followed  by a  subjective,  relationship-oriented, 
and  emotionally  intense  "realm  of  light,"  reflect  the  distinctions  between  the 
conscious  mind  and  the  unconscious  mind.  The  "darkness"  stage  seems  to  be 
experienced  exclusively  through  the  conscious  half  of  the  psyche,  while  the 
"light"  stage  seems 
to  be  experienced  exclusively  through  the  unconscious, 
as  if the  two  were  operating  independently  during  these  episodes.  A similarly 
polarized  dichotomy  can be  found  in the accounts  of reincarnation,  of the  Realm 
of  Bewildered  Souls,  of the  void  between  lives,  of the  behavior  of  ghosts  and 
apparitions,  and  in  statements  about  the  afterlife  by  parapsychologists.  The 
"Binary Soul  Doctrine"  hypothesis,  that the  two  halves  of the  psyche  separate 
after death,  offers  a  consistent explanation  for  these  afterlife phenomena.  

KEY  WORDS:  binary  soul doctrine;  survival  of  death;  near-death  experience; 
reincarnation.  

Today,  many  believe  they  truly  know  what  awaits  us  on  the  other 
side  of death's  door,  while  others  are just  as  convinced  that  this,  the 
greatest  of  mysteries,  will  never  be  solved.  Adding  fuel  to  the  latter 
argument,  disagreement  remains  among  those  who  assert  they  do 

Peter  Novak  is  the  free-lance  author  of  The  Division  of  Consciousness: The  Secret 
Afterlife  of the  Human Psyche.  Reprint  requests  should  be  addressed  to  Mr.  Novak  at 
1428  Illinois  Avenue,  LaPorte,  IN  46350  (e-mail:  division@divisiontheory.com).

Journal of Near-Death  Studies,  20(3),  Spring 2002  C 2002  Human  Sciences  Press,  Inc.

143

144

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

know;  and  contradictions  abound  between  afterlife  models  of different 
groups.  But long ago,  this was  not the  case.  Instead,  virtually  the same 
model of death was once  held in common by cultures all  across the globe.  
And  this  lost  vision  of  the  afterlife,  which  appears  to  be  consistent 
with  the  latest  findings  in  modern  psychology,  neuropsychology,  and 
near-death  studies,  carries  profound  implications  for  modern  afterlife 
research.  

The  Ancient  Binary  Soul  Doctrine 

From  Egypt  to  India  to  Hawaii  to  America,  cultures  all  over  the 
world  once  believed  very  much  the  same  thing:  that  people  had  not 
one,  but  two  souls,  and  that  those  two  souls  tended  to  separate  from 
one  another  at  death,  each  going  on  to  an  entirely  different  afterlife 
experience.  But  if  those  divided  parts  could  be  reunited,  the  person 
would  be  restored  to  wholeness,  thereafter  enjoying  an  eternal  divine 
existence.  Alien  as  it  is  to  modern  ears,  this  binary  soul  concept  was 
probably  the  closest  thing  this  planet  has  ever  had  to  a  single  world 
religion.  Its  origins  are  prehistoric;  it  seems  to  have  already  been  in 
existence  at the  dawn  of civilization.  Yet  it uses  the  same  model  of the 
self described  by modern  psychologists  and  neuropsychologists,  and  it 
predicts  the  very conditions  described  by  modern research  into  NDEs, 
past-life  memories,  apparitions,  and  other afterlife  phenomena.  

This  ancient  tale  of  dividing  souls,  or something  very  similar  to  it, 
is  found  repeated  in culture  after  culture,  turning  up  again  and  again 
in  early  afterlife  traditions  all  over  the  globe.  Ancient  Egypt,  Israel, 
Persia,  Greece,  India,  Islam,  China,  Australia,  Hawaii,  Alaska,  the 
Dakota tribe  of North America,  and  dozens of other  indigenous peoples 
of North and South America,  Asia,  Europe,  and Africa  all subscribed  to 
such  a Binary  Soul  Doctrine.  The  specific  details  are  sometimes  quite 
different,  but  the core  message  is  always  the same:  that people  possess 
two  souls  that  can  and  often  do  separate  at death,  each  going  off into 
a different  afterlife  experience.  And  these  otherwise  very  different  and 
alien  cultures  consistently  described  these  two  souls  in  similar  ways, 
uncannily  paralleling  today's  scientists'  descriptions  of the  conscious 
and  unconscious.  Again  and  again,  the  reader  finds  one  soul  being 
described  as  objective,  masculine,  rational,  intelligent,  active,  and 
possessing  independent  free  will,  while  the  other  is  described  as 
subjective,  feminine,  emotional,  responsive,  and  in  possession  of  the 
memory  records.

PETER NOVAK

145

The Egyptian Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

From  its  earliest  days,  Egyptian  culture,  commonly  recognized  as 
the  earliest  civilization  in  history,  embraced  the  legend  of Osiris,  his 
doctrine  of  eternal  life  becoming  the  center  focus  of  their  religion.  
Osiris was reported  to have  divided into pieces  when he  died, but when 
those fragments  were  reassembled,  he  became  restored to a  divine  and 
eternal  existence.  This  model  of death  was  reflected  in  the  Egyptian 
doctrine  of the  division  of the two  ba and  ka  souls  after  death,  and  the 
expectation  that if the  ba  and ka  could  be  reunited,  the  person  would 
then  be  fully  reconstituted  and  perfected,  transfigured  into  a  divine 
being like  Osiris  himself.  

This  was extremely  old  information,  even  then:  many  of the  prayers 
of  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead  (Budge,  1967)  were  already  so 
ancient  that  the  scribes  who  copied  them  were  sometimes  uncertain 
just what  those  prayers  were  supposed  to  mean.  Those  prayers  reveal 
much  about the  afterlife  beliefs  of Egyptians,  strongly  suggesting  that 
ancient  Nile  culture  was  aware  of  a  subtle  truth  that  our  scientists 
have  only  rediscovered  and  verified  in  recent  years:  that  the  human 
mind is differentiated  into two distinct components,  the conscious  mind, 
which  possesses  the rational intellect  and the autonomous  free will,  and 
the  unconscious  mind,  which  possesses  the  emotions  and  the  memory 
(Schiffer,  1998).  Ancient Egyptians  believed much  the  same thing,  that 
human beings  possess  not  one  but two  souls,  two  distinct  nonmaterial, 
psychological  components  that,  they  believed,  both  survived  death.  
While  Egyptians  also  distinguished  and  named  a  number  of  other 
different  elements  of the  individual,  only two  of these,  the  ba  and  ka, 
were  thought capable  of surviving after  death  (El Mahdy,  1989).  

A  third  soul-like  element,  the  khu  or  aakhu, was  also  often  said  to 
exist  after  death,  but  this  soul  existed  only  potentially,  created  out 
of the  reunion  of  the  ba  and  ka  after  death.  The  aakhu was  not  an 
additional,  third soul  one  also  possessed;  rather, it was  an  entirely new 
kind of soul one  could  potentially become,  one which  did not exist  at all 
prior  to  death,  and  after  death,  it  came  into  existence  only  if all  went 
well  with the  ba-ka reunion.  

The  Ba  as the  Conscious  Mind.  Like  the  conscious  and  unconscious 
of  today's  science,  both  the  ba  and  ka  were  considered  to  be  integral 
elements  of the  self.  In fact,  both  the  ba  and ka  carried, independently 
of  one  another,  the  meaning  of  "the  self."  The  ba  was  the  living, 
conscious  self.  Just  like  the  conscious  mind  of today's  psychology,  the 
ba  was  considered  to  possess  its  own  independent  and  autonomous

146

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

free  will,  focused  self-conscious  awareness,  intelligence,  and  the ability 
to  move  and  communicate  (Ries,  1987).  Like  the  conscious  mind,  the 
ba embodied  the  objective  perspective,  viewing  the  outer  world  as  an 
object  separate and  distinct  from  itself.  Like  the  conscious  mind,  each 
ba was  the lone  master of its own decisions,  lone  witness  of its own  inner 
domain; the  ba was  the  inner, private self,  the utterly  alone  experience 
of being  that  can  never  be  truly  shared  with  another  (Wheeler,  1999).  
And  like  the  conscious  mind,  the  ba  was  conceived  of as  the  fount  of 
intellect:  while  the ka  was  credited  with  making  the body  talk,  the  ba 
was  what caused  the  words  to  make  sense  (Effland,  1999).  

But quite  unlike  modern scientists'  depiction  of the  conscious  mind, 
the ba  was  also  credited with  permanent possession  of both  the  spark 
of life  force  and  the  power  of motion  and  animation  (Ries,  1987).  The 
ba could  never die,  never cease  to exist,  never  cease  to be  conscious  and 
aware (Budge,  1967).  The ba would always  be  alive and would  always be 
aware  of its own  existence.  But its  sense  of continuity,  the coherence  of 
its sense  of self,  was  quite a  different  matter. That was  not  guaranteed, 
and  all  the  funerary  rituals  and  efforts  of ancient  Egyptians  had  but 
one  purpose:  to  maintain  the  coherency  of  that  self-experience  while 
passing through  the  doors  of death (Wheeler,  1999).  

The Ka  as the Unconscious Mind.  Unlike  the  ba, the ka  could  cease 
to  exist  (El  Mahdy,  1989).  In  a  twist  that  has  confused  scholars  for 
centuries,  the  ka,  a  different  element  altogether,  was  somehow  also 
considered  to be  "the self." Actually,  ka is the Egyptian word for  "you," a 
pun-like  choice  of  words  that emphasizes  the ka's role  in relationships 
(Wheeler,  1999).  In  a  great  many  respects,  the  ka  parallels  modern 
scientists'  concept of the unconscious half of the human  psyche  (Crehan, 
1976).  Like  the  unconscious,  the ka was associated  with  dream  activity 
during  sleep  (Effland,  1999).  Like  the  unconscious,  the ka was  thought 
to  be  able  to  work  in  secret,  without  its  owner's  knowledge,  even  able 
to  deceive  or betray its  owner.  Like  the  unconscious,  the ka could  either 
work for or against  its owner (Wheeler,  1999).  Like  the unconscious,  the 
ka was  thought to  contain  a record,  or  be  a model,  of all  one's  personal 
memories  and subjective  emotions,  and thus, one's  sense  of self-identity 
(El  Mahdy,  1989).  Like  the  unconscious,  the ka  was  polarized  towards 
a  subjective  or  intersubjective  orientation,  providing  one's  ability  to 
relate  to  and  interact  with  others;  it  was,  like  the  unconscious,  the 
source  of  one's  subjective  sense  of belonging,  of  living  connection  with 
others.  And  therefore,  it  was,  again  like  the  unconscious,  thought  to 
be  the  source  of  one's  sense  of  morality  and  conscience.  And  like

PETER  NOVAK

147

the  unconscious,  the  ka  was  considered  to  be  moldable,  changeable, 
and  potentially  unreliable  (Wheeler,  1999).  Analysis  of  Egyptian  art 
identifying  the  ka  with  the  unconscious:  just  as  the 
also  suggests 
unconscious 
is  thought  of  as  the  equal  but  opposite  dark  interior 
to  the  conscious  mind's  lighted  exterior,  so  too  the  ka  was  often 
depicted  in  art  as  a  blackened  reverse  image  of  the  person  (Effland, 
1999).  

The  ka was  said  to be  the person's  "double"; it embodied  the  pattern 
of  one's  person  by  molding  itself  into  a  perfect  image  or  likeness 
of  the  individual  and  his  character  (El  Mahdy,  1989).  In  fact,  the 
ancient  Egyptian  word  ka  still  lives  on  in  our  language,  in  words 
like  "character" and "charisma" (Wheeler,  1999).  Like  the  unconscious, 
the ka  preserved within  itself  a  complete  record or pattern of one's  life 
history and personal  nature; in other words,  it contained  the  shapes  of 
one's  memories,  on  which  the  continuity  and  coherence  of  one's  sense 
of self-identity  depends.  It constituted  a  complete  database  of all  one's 
individual characteristics,  disposition,  and attributes, all  one's feelings, 
emotions,  needs,  desires,  fears,  expectations,  and appetites  (El  Mahdy, 
1989).  In  short,  the  ka  was  the  "form"  that  gave  shape  to  the  ba's 
"substance."  The  ka  was  closely  associated  with  the  concept  of  form 
and  image;  it  was  what  allowed  different  shapes  to  be  taken  (Ries, 
1987).  

The  Relationship  of the Ba  and Ka  During Life.  The  one  thing the 
ka  lacked  was  sustenance.  The  ka  was  thought  not  to  possess  its 
own  inherent  spark  of  life  force  that  could  keep  it  eternally  alive, 
energized,  and  active,  so  it needed  to  look  to  other,  outside  sources  to 
acquire  a regular  supply  of  its  necessary  nourishment  (Davies,  1987).  
The ba, which  was  thought to possess  that eternally-living  spark of life 
force,  was  said  to  nestle  inside  the ka  during one's  human life  (Davies, 
1987);  the ka held  the ba  within  it like  a cup  holds  water,  embracing  it.  
In fact,  the symbol  for the ka was  a pair of upraised arms,  stretched out 
in a welcoming  embrace,  yet  also  raised up in a way  that brings to mind 
the image  of a cup ready to be filled.  In the same  way,  the conscious  mind 
can be  said  to be  contained,  and therefore shaped,  by  the  unconscious.  
The conscious  has no  shape of its own,  no unique  personality,  except  as 
informed  through the  memory  shape  of the  unconscious;  without  the 
unconscious  with  its  memory  and  emotions,  the  conscious,  although 
aware,  would  be  as  blank  and  featureless  as  a  sheet  of  white  paper.  
And just as  the ba  was  thought to animate the  ka,  so  too  the  conscious 
mind  animates  and activates  the  otherwise  dormant unconscious.

148

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

During life, the ka dwelt within  the heart,  and the ba dwelt inside the 
ka. This union of the  ba and ka during  life  was intimate;  the  two could 
not  be  separated  prior  to  death.  The  ka  was  the  personal  possession 
of the  ba; they  were  like  two  embracing  lovers,  two  conjoined  beings 
(Davies,  1987).  The  ka  was  thought  to  travel  away  from  the  body  in 
dreams  while  the  person  was  alive  (Effland,  1999),  but  such journeys 
did  not sever the  connection  between  it and the  ba (Davies,  1987).  

The Division of Ba and Ka at Death.  But after  the  person  died,  the 
ba and ka,  which  until then  had known  only  partnership,  functioning 
for  all intents and purposes  as a single  unit all  during the  person's life, 
now  found  themselves  divided,  alienated,  separated  from  one  another 
(Watterson,  1984).  This  abrupt,  disorienting  division  seems  to  have 
been  associated  with  the  ba experiencing  a  loss  of memory;  multiple 
chapters in the Egyptian Book of the Dead are dedicated  to praying  that 
the  deceased's  memory  be  returned  to  him  after  he  has  left  the  body 
(Budge,  1967).  This  could  this  be  accomplished  only  by  re-connecting 
the  ba back to  the ka, which contains  the full  pattern  and  record of the 
person's  life,  his  memories.  In fact,  all  the  funerary  prayers  of ancient 
Egypt  were  designed  with  but  a  single  purpose  in  mind:  to  reverse 
this division  and to  get the  ba and ka to  reunite  so the  deceased  could 
become  a completed,  perfected  being,  an aakhu (El  Mahdy,  1989).  

The  Transfiguration of the Aakhu.  If this  reunion  of the  ba  and  ka 
was  successfully  accomplished,  it  was  thought,  the  person  would  be 
transformed  into  an  aakhu,  something  akin  to  a  shining,  glorified, 
immortal  angel.  Often  called  an  Osiris,  meaning  one  whose  parts 
have  been  reunited,  the  aakhu  was  the  true,  complete  self  in  its 
fully awakened,  perfected,  and whole  state  after  death  (Budge,  1967).  
The  word  aakhu carried  the  sense  of one  who  had  been  "pulled  back 
together,"  one  who  was  now  fully  "self-possessed"  (Wheeler,  1999), 
meanings  that  reflect  the  reunification  of  the  ba  and  ka,  and  the 
reacquisition  of  one's  past  memories,  personality,  and  sense  of  self
identity that would  thereby occur.  

The  Second  Death.  But  if the  ba and  ka  did  not  reunite,  then  the 
ba  was  thought  to  flit  away  freely  and  without  concern  to  heaven, 
where  it would  still enjoy unlimited  freedom  and happiness,  doing and 
going  where  it pleased,  and conversing  with other ba's in  heaven (Ries, 
1987).  Meanwhile,  the  ghostly-appearing  ka  would  remain  behind, 
trapped  in  a feebleminded  (El  Mahdy,  1989),  cold,  hungry,  needy,  and 
vulnerable  state in the tomb (Budge,  1967).  The ka was thought to have

PETER NOVAK

149

many regular and pressing  requirements after death, but,  without the 
animating mobility  it received  from the  ba,  its needs  went  unmet,  and 
it  would  eventually  disintegrate.  If the ka  was  rejoined  to  its  ba,  the 
two  of  them  together  becoming  an  aakhu, then  all  those  needs  of the 
ka  would  be  thereby  instantly  and  eternally  fulfilled  (Budge,  1967).  
But  failing  that reunion,  the ka  would  perish in a "second  death" that, 
to  the  Egyptian,  was  the  worst  disaster imaginable  (El  Mahdy,  1989); 
the  ka  would  be  utterly annihilated,  made  as  if  it had  never  existed 
(Watterson,  1984).  

The  Greek Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

When  one  peers  back  into  the  dimmest  most  distant  traces  of  the 
ancient  Greek  civilization,  one  finds  the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine  already 
in  full  flower.  In  Homer's Iliad  and Odyssey,  the  oldest  Greek  literary 
texts,  two  distinct  types  of  souls  are  distinguished,  the  psuche  and 
the  thymos.  Thought  to  be  free,  unencumbered,  and  immortal,  the 
psuche  held  the  spark  of  life,  and  while  it  could  not  exit  the  body 
without  causing  the  death  of  the  individual,  it  was  thought  to  be 
able  to  reincarnate.  And  while  the psuche  was  not  thought  to  possess 
any  feelings  or  emotions,  it  was  thought  to  be  the  center  of  all 
abstract  intellectual  thought.  The  other  soul,  the  thymos,  possessed 
one's  feelings,  emotions,  needs,  and  urges.  After  death,  the  thymos 
separated from  the psuche  and was  lost  (Bremmer,  1987).  

The Early Indian Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

Vedic  India also  held  that people  possessed  two  soul-like  elements, 
an  asu  and  a  manas  (Van  Nooten  and  Hilland,  1994).  The  asu  was 
active,  conscious,  sentient,  and immortal, carrying the spark of life.  The 
manas  held  the  internal feelings,  emotions,  and subjective  perception, 
providing a  person  with his  or her ability  to  perceive  and  comprehend 
various  relationships with  others (Mahony,  1987).  After  death,  the asu 
could  simply reincarnate  again, but the  manas could  be  greatly harmed 
by  death;  if it  separated  from  the  animating  and  cognizing  asu  after 
death, it would  become  inert and lifeless  (Ries,  1987).  

The Later Indian Version of the  Binary Soul Doctrine 

Modern  Hindu philosophy  also  holds  that two  nonphysical  elements 
of  the  self  survive  the  death  of  the  physical  body.  And  again,  one  of

150

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

these  two,  the  sukshma  sharira, often  called  in  English  the  "subtle," 
"astral," or  "emotional" body,  contains  one's  emotions  and  memories, 
while  the other, the karana sharira, the "causal" or "mental" body,  holds 
one's  rational  intellect  and  independent  free  will.  During  life  these 
are  deeply  integrated  deeply,  but  after  death,  the  two  separate,  after 
which  the  astral  body  starts  to  severely  deteriorate  (Bhattacharyya, 
1987).  

The Persian Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

Ancient  Persians  also  held  that  the  human  soul  was  composed  of 
two  twin  parts:  the  urvan and  the  daena.  The  urvan  was  conscious, 
active,  and  verbal,  and  was  immortal  and  unharmed  by  death.  The 
daena,  created  or  shaped  by  the  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds  of  the 
urvan during life,  contained  the  conscience  and a perfect mirror image 
or pattern of the person's self,  including a perfect memory of the person's 
life.  During  a  great Judgment  after  death,  the  two  often  had  a  great 
falling  out,  when  the  urvan found  itself confronted  by  the full  memory 
record carried  within  the  daena.  Immortality  required  the  successful 
reconciliation  of the  urvan  and daena after  death  (Ries,  1987).  

The  Chinese Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

Ancient  Chinese  yin/yang  philosophy  parallels  the  Binary  Soul 
Doctrine  in many  respects,  asserting that  not  merely  the  human  soul, 
but  all  reality  is  based  on  and  comprised  of two  equal  but  opposite 
interplaying  forces.  Instead  of  leaving  this  concept  in  the  abstract, 
China's  Chou  dynasty  brought  it  down  to  the  level  of the  individual, 
asserting that each  person had two distinct  souls:  one  corresponding  to 
the yin force,  the other to the yang force  (Wei-Ming,  1987).  The hun was 
the  yang soul,  conscious,  active,  intelligent,  masculine,  and dominant.  
The  p'o  was  the  yin  soul,  earthy,  emotional,  only  semiconscious, 
feminine,  and passive.  After  death these  two  souls  parted company;  the 
hun  soul left  the  body  unharmed,  returning to  heaven  from  whence  it 
came,  while  the p'o soul would  find itself trapped in a dark underground 
realm in a dim-witted  state (Seidel,  1987).  

The Hawaiian Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

In  Hawaii  these  two  souls  were  called  the  uhane,  which  was 
thought  to  be  masculine,  intelligent,  and  possess  free  will,  and  the

PETER NOVAK

151

unihipili, which  was  thought  to  be  feminine,  emotional,  and  possess 
the  memory.  If the  uhane  became  separated  from  the  unihipili  after 
death,  it  would  lose  its  memory,  and  end  up  wandering  in  a  great 
helpless  confusion,  often  going  on  to  reincarnate. The  unihipili, mean
while,  would  still  recall  its  memories  very  well,  but  would  become 
feebleminded,  behaving  in  an  automatic  and  suggestible  fashion.  The 
ancient  Hawaiian  Kahuna  sorcerers  claimed  to  be  able  to  control, 
manipulate,  and  enslave  the  separated  unihipili  souls  of  the  dead, 
commanding  them  to  do  their  bidding  much  as  a  hypnotist  controls 
the  thoughts  and  actions  of  his  or  her subject.  And  like  the  Egyptian 
aakhu,  the  Hawaiians  also  named  a  third,  higher  kind  of  soul,  the 
aumakua,  which  was  created  out  of  the  two  binary  souls  when  they 
would  successfully  unite into  a  singular unit (Long,  1965).  

The Hebrew Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

Ancient  Israel  also  held  that people  are  comprised  of  two  spiritual 
elements:  a  ruwach,  commonly  translated as  "spirit," and  a  nephesh, 
translated  as  "soul."  The  ruwach  was  active,  strong, 
commonly 
conscious, 
intelligent  (Strong,  1984),  and  communicated  with  words 
(2  Samuel  23:2).  It  was  immortal,  existing  before  the  person's  birth 
and  surviving  his  or  her  death  unharmed,  always  "returning to  god 
who  gave  it"  (Ecclesiastes  12:7).  But  the  nephesh,  which  embodied 
one's  emotions,  memories,  and  sense  of  self-identity,  was  vulnerable 
and  could  be  greatly  harmed  by  death,  becoming  trapped  in  a  weak 
and  feebleminded  state  in  She'ol,  a  dark,  underground,  dreamlike 
netherworld  (Ries,  1987).  

The Islamic Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

In  ancient  Islam,  the  two  souls  were  called  the  ruh  and  the  nafs, 
linguistically  similar  to  the  Hebrew  ruwach  and  nephesh.  Like  the 
Hebrew  ruwach,  the  ruh carried the  spark of  life,  was  associated  with 
the  rational intellect,  and  was  capable  of communication,  and like  the 
Hebrew  nephesh,  the  nafs  was  associated  with  one's  feelings,  needs, 
and desires  (Ries,  1987).  

The Christian Version of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

Early Christians also  distinguished  between  the  soul  and  the  spirit 
and,  as  one  Biblical  passage  reveals,  it  was  openly  taught  in  the

152

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

early  days  of the  Church  that  the  soul  and  the  spirit  were  capable  of 
separating from one  another: "The word  of God  is living  and active  and 
more powerful  than any two-edged  sword,  and cuts  so  deeply  it divides 
the  soul  from  the  spirit"  (Hebrews  4:12).  An  archaeological  discovery 
in  1948 raised the  intriguing suggestion  that  the Binary  Soul  Doctrine 
may  have  played  a  far  more  central  role  in  early  Christian  theology 
than  today's  culture  has  been  led  to  believe.  A  nearly  2000-year-old 
cache  of  lost  early  Christian scrolls  was  unearthed in  Nag  Hammadi, 
Egypt  (Robinson,  1977),  indicating  that  early  Church  teachings  once 
credited  great relevance  to  the distinction  and  interaction  between  the 
soul  and  the  spirit  (The  Secret  Book  of James  11:38-39,  12:1-6,  in 
Robinson,  1977).  Three  lost  Christian  gospels,  the  Gospel  of Thomas, 
the Gospel of Truth, and the Gospel of Philip,  return again and again to 
the issue of division, mysteriously  insisting that Jesus somehow  divided 
into two  halves  when  He died  on the  cross  (Gospel  of Philip  68:26-29, 
in  Robinson,  1977),  that all  people  were  in  danger  of  such  a  division 
(Gospel  of Thomas  11,  in Robinson,  1977),  that  the  division of the  soul 
and spirit (Exegesis  on the Soul  133:4-9,  in Robinson,  1977)  or of Adam 
and Eve  (Gospel  of  Philip 68:22-26,  in  Robinson,  1977)  was  the  origin 
of death,  and that  "making the  two  one"  was  key  to  achieving  eternal 
life (Gospel  of Thomas  22, in Robinson,  1977).  

Other Western Versions of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

The  Mandaean  religion,  a  still-living  offshoot  of  the  gnostic  branch 
of early  Christianity,  believes  even  today  that the  living  possess  both 
soul and spirit,  and that these  two elements  of the  self split apart  after 
death.  Three  days  after  burial,  Mandaean  priests  celebrate  a  ritual 
called  the  masiqta, the  aim  of which  is  to  reunite  the  soul  and  spirit 
in the afterlife,  thus  creating a new  "Lightworld" body for the  deceased 
that will allow  him to live  among  the blessed  dead  (Buckley,  1987).  

Manichaeism,  another  offshoot  of Gnostic Christianity,  also  believed 
there  were  two  distinct  halves  to  the  human  soul.  The  nous  was  the 
half of the self that was  immortal,  while  the psuche was  the  half that 
was  vulnerable  and in danger  of being  destroyed  during  the transition 
of death.  

Emmanuel  Swedenborg,  founder  of  the  New  Church,  also  spoke 
of  two  distinct  halves  to  the  human  soul,  calling  them  the  inward 
and  outward  thoughts.  At  death,  these  two  elements  part  company, 
according  to  Swedenborg,  and  the  outward  thought,  which  holds  all 
one's  insights  and data  and the  capacity  for logical  thought,  was  lost,

PETER NOVAK

153

while  the  inward  thought  continued  on  in  a  dreamlike  netherworld 
(Swedenborg,  1979/1758).  

Rudolf  Steiner,  theologian  and  founder  of  the  Waldorf  Schools  for 
children,  also  recognized  both  soul  and  spirit,  and  taught  that  these 
two  permanently  part company  after  death,  after  which  the  soul  would 
slowly  disintegrate  and cease  to  exist  altogether.  Again,  like  so  many 
other traditions did, Steiner viewed the soul much like today's scientists 
view  the  unconscious,  crediting  it with  possession  of the  memory  and 
emotions,  and  the  spirit like  the  conscious,  crediting  it  with  objective, 
rational thought. But Steiner held that the eventual  separation of spirit 
from  soul  in  the  afterlife  was  a  good  thing,  necessary  for  the  higher 
evolution  of the spirit (Steiner,  1984).  

The  popular  modern  psychic  James Van  Praagh  also  maintains that 
discarding half of our being  after death is  an advantageous  eventuality.  
He  teaches  that  human beings  possess  two  halves  to  the  self,  both  an 
astral body and a mental body,  which separate at death.  The astral body, 
he  maintains,  is  made  up  of  all  one's  emotions,  yearnings,  memories, 
and desires, while  the mental body carries with one's rational, objective, 
logical thought processes.  During life,  these  two  bodies  intermingle  and 
are interdependent on  one  another, making us whole beings,  according 
to  Van  Praagh.  But  in  death,  we  completely  slough  off  the  emotional 
body,  leaving it behind  to disintegrate in an event Van Praagh identifies 
as  the  legendary  "second  death"  spoken  of  in  Hindu,  Egyptian,  and 
Christian  traditions (Van  Praagh,  1999).  However,  while  some,  such 
as  Steiner  and  Van  Praagh,  may  hold  that  discarding  the  emotional 
half  of the  self  is  necessary  and  good  for  one's  subsequent  spiritual 
evolution  in  the  afterlife,  Leo  Buscaglia,  America's  popular  cultural 
guru  on  "being  fully  human,"  would  disagree.  Buscaglia  has  spent 
his  entire  public  career arguing just  the  opposite:  that  one's  feelings, 
emotions,  memories,  and  interpersonal,  intersubjective  sense  are  the 
most  valuable  aspects  of  the  self (Buscaglia,  1986).  If Buscaglia  were 
correct,  it  seems,  no  afterlife  without  these  qualities  would  be  worth 
the bother.  

Tribal Versions of the Binary Soul Doctrine 

The belief  in  a dividing  binary  soul  is  also  found  in  many  primitive 
cultures across  the globe. The two souls  of Inner Asia's  Tunguz tribe is a 
typical example,  in which  one  soul  is free  and independent  after  death, 
returning to heaven  to  wait  until it reincarnates, while  the  second  soul 
becomes  eternally  imprisoned  in an dark  netherworld.  The Australian

154

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

aboriginal  tribes  also  believed  that  people  possess  two  souls,  one  that 
reincarnates  into  another  human  body  after  death,  and  another that 
takes  up  eternal  residence  after  death  in  a  dreamlike  realm  known  as 
the "Dreaming" (Ries,  1987).  Africa's  Mossi  tribe believed  that human 
beings  have  one  masculine  and  one  feminine  soul,  and  that  death 
divides  these  two  apart  (Riviere,  1987).  Africa's  Samo  tribe  called 
their  two  souls  the  ri and  the  mere;  the  ri  soul  contains  the  person's 
thought  and  life  force,  reincarnating after  death,  while  the  mere  soul 
contains  a  perfect  record  of that  person's  nature  and  characteristics, 
and becomes  permanently  trapped in  a  netherworld  after  death  (Ries, 
1987).  

The  Binary  Soul  Doctrine  was  once  extremely  widespread  in  the 
Americas;  tribes  from Alaska  to  South America  believed  in a "corporeal 
soul"  that gave  life,  consciousness,  and the  faculty  of  movement,  and 
a  "free soul"  or  "dream soul"  that would  become  trapped in  the  realm 
of the  dead  after  death.  The  corporal  soul  provided  the  life  force,  and 
could  not  exit the  body without resulting  in the death  of the individual.  
But  the  free  soul  could  leave  the  body  during life,  and  was  thought  to 
do  so  often,  such  as  during dreams,  trances,  and  mystical  experiences.  
Alaska's  Inuit believed  in  two  souls,  one  which  held  the  life  force  and 
reincarnated into  a new  body after  death,  and another,  the  tarnneg, or 
double  of the  person,  which  permanently  entered  a  realm  of  the  dead 
(Ries,  1987).  North  America's  Dakota  tribe  called  their  two  surviving 
souls  the nagi and the  niya. The nagi held the  power  of movement  and 
independent free  will,  and after death  it  could  either join  the  world  of 
the spirits or be forced to wander aimlessly.  The niya held the conscience 
and memory and helped  a person  to  relate to  and interact with  others.  
After  death,  the  niya was  thought to testify  against the  other soul  in a 
great Judgment after death, much like the Persian daena  and Egyptian 
ka  (Riviere,  1987).  

Linguistic Evidence of a Cultural Memory of Binary Souls 

This ancient idea  of two  dividing  souls  has  been  largely  forgotten  by 
contemporary  cultures.  But  while  modern  civilization  may  have  lost 
sight  of dividing  souls  as  a  model  of death,  we  have  not  lost  sight  of 
binary  souls  as  a  picture  of the  makeup  of  a  human  being.  The  idea 
that people  are three-part creatures,  having  one  body which  holds  two 
soul-type  elements,  is still a very familiar image,  an ancient insight that 
still  lives  and breathes in our words.  We regularly  describe  ourselves  as 
having body,  soul,  and spirit, or body, mind  and soul,  or body,  heart and

PETER NOVAK

155

soul,  or  some  other  variation  of this  theme.  We  are  not even  sure what 
we  mean  by  these  terms anymore,  but  we use  them  nonetheless.  Still, 
most  references  to  "soul"  or  "spirit"  have  been  generally  regarded  as 
pointing to more  or less  the same  thing for much  of the last  2000 years.  
But that may  be  changing  in this  century.  

The  Scientific  Version  of the Binary  Soul  Doctrine 

One  of the most astonishing  facts  of this age  is  that our culture,  after 
thousands  of years,  has found  reason  to  again  resuscitate  and embrace 
the  ancient  concept  of binary  souls.  Having  spent  nearly  a  century 
applying the most rigorous  scientific  tests,  humanity has again  arrived 
at the conclusion  of the ancients:  that we are indeed two-part creatures, 
comprised  of a conscious  mind and  an unconscious  mind.  

Humanity  actually  reached  this  conclusion  not  once  but  twice  in 
the  20th  century.  In  the  early  1900s,  Sigmund  Freud  and  Carl  Jung 
first  reintroduced  and  popularized  the  notion  that  the  human  psyche 
is  composed  of two  distinct  parts.  Later  scientists  went  on  to  describe 
and define  those  two parts  in  virtually the  same  language  the  ancients 
used  to  describe  the  two  souls  of the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine:  one  was 
active,  objective,  logical, intelligent,  masculine, and  had free  will, while 
the  other  was  subjective,  emotional,  feminine,  and  held  the  memory 
(Jung, 1960).  With the advent of neuropsychology  over the last 30 years, 
the basic  premise  of the  two-part  mind has been  powerfully  reinforced 
and  substantiated;  the  study  of the  two  hemispheres  of the  brain  has 
again concluded that two entirely separate  and distinct minds do indeed 
coexist  in  the  brain,  one  residing  in  the  right  hemisphere,  and  one  in 
the  left  (Ornstein,  1997).  Neuropsychologist  Fredrick  Schiffer  (1998) 
has maintained  (Schiffer,  p.  79,  80,  84-85): 

We  have  two minds,  one  associated  with  each  hemisphere....  The  two 
minds  are  different....  The  dichotomy  of  mind  is entirely  normal-it 
is,  in fact,  the  way  we  human  beings  are  made.... The  two  minds  can 
cooperate  with  each  other...or  they  can  sabotage  each  other....  the 
two  minds  constantly  interact....  Not  only  have  we  discovered  two 
intact  minds  in  split-brain  research  and  in  psychology,  but  we  have 
found  that  in  both  cases,  the  two  minds  seem  to  interact  in  similar 
ways....  A  number  of  authors,  including  myself,  have  turned  to  the 
split-brain  studies  to  advance  the  notion  that  the  right  hemisphere 
is  the  site  of the  Freudian  unconscious....  The  basic  idea  emanating 
from the split-brain  studies-that of mental  duality-offers  a profound 
foundation  for  any  psychological  thinking.  (pp.  79-85)

156

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

So,  just  as  Freud  and  Jung  maintained  at  the  beginning  of  the 
20th  century,  and just like  the  Egyptians,  Greeks,  Persians,  Chinese, 
and so  many  other peoples  maintained thousands  of years  ago,  modern 
neuropsychologists  are  also  finding  themselves  repeating  the  same 
ancient  story,  perhaps the  most  ancient of  all  revelations:  that human 
beings  have  two  minds,  or two  souls.  However,  modern  scientists  have 
not  merely  rediscovered  humanity's two  souls,  but have  greatly  added 
to  the  scant information about them that had managed  to trickle  down 
to  us  through  history.  And  what  modern  scientists  have  added  to  our 
knowledge  about  the  nature of the  conscious  and unconscious  seems  to 
explain  a  great  deal  about  the  afterlife  traditions of  the  ancients,  as 
well  as the  reports of today's  afterlife  researchers.  

A  Pairing of Opposites 

Scientists  have  taught  us  that  the  conscious  and  unconscious  are 
is  active,  while 
in  many  respects:  the  conscious 
exact  opposites 
the  unconscious  is  reactive  and  responsive;  the  conscious  seems  to 
exercise  autonomous  free  will,  functioning  under  its  own  initiative 
functions  automatically  and 
and  volition,  while  the  unconscious 
instinctively  (Freud,  1965/1932);  the  conscious  is  objective  while  the 
unconscious  is  subjective;  and  the  conscious  is  intellectual  while  the 
unconscious  is emotional  (Jung,  1953).  And  modern neuropsychologists 
have added even greater depth to our comprehension  of these dynamics, 
teaching  us  that  the  conscious  mind  is  verbally  oriented  while  the 
unconscious  is  nonverbal,  thinking  and  communicating  via  symbols, 
pictures,  gestures,  and  metaphors  (Ornstein,  1997).  

Neuropsychologists  have  revealed  that the  conscious  mind  sees  the 
differences  and  distinctions  between  things,  while  the  unconscious  is 
geared  to  do  just  the  opposite:  to  see  the  connections,  relationships, 
and  similarities  between  things  (Springer  and  Deutsch,  1985).  The 
conscious  sees  the  trees,  the  unconscious  sees  the  forest;  the  conscious 
reads  the  text,  the  unconscious  perceives  the  context;  the  conscious 
sees  the  details,  the  unconscious  sees  the  meaning  (Ornstein,  1997).  
This  division  of  labor  seems  to  explain  why  the  ancients  insisted 
that  only  one  of  their  two  souls  possessed 
independent  free  will.  
Being  blind  to  the  differences  and  distinctions  between  things,  the 
unconscious  does  not  realize  the  existence  of  choices,  options,  and 
alternatives,  is  therefore  unable  to  choose  or  decide,  cannot  exercise 
self-determination,  therefore  lacks  autonomous  free  will,  and  thus  is 
like  a  mindless  machine  running on  automatic.

PETER NOVAK

157

Remarkably  like  the  yin  and  yang  of  classic  Chinese  philosophy, 
the  unconscious  and  unconscious  seem  to  be  closely  embraced  in 
a  dance,  with  the  conscious  leading  by  making  new  choices  and 
decisions.  Whenever  the  conscious  mind  initiates  a  move,  the  reactive 
and  responsive  unconscious  makes  a  corresponding  move.  Whenever 
the  conscious  mind  chooses  or  acts,  the  unconscious  mind  reacts 
immediately  and directly to that choice  or act,  automatically  generating 
its  own  responses,  in  the  form  of feelings,  emotions,  impressions,  and 
insights,  that are then released  back  into  the  conscious  mind.  

The  conscious  and  unconscious  are  so  tightly  intertwined  in  this 
dance that they give the compelling  illusion of existing  and functioning 
as  a single  unit.  Just  as one's  left and  right  eyes  produce  two  separate 
and distinct visual fields  that are united and integrated  in one's  mental 
experience  into  a  single  vision,  so  too  the  two  halves  of the  psyche 
are  so  intimately  integrated  together  in  one's  mental  experience  that 
they  too  seem  to  be  a  single  unit,  a  single  experience,  a  single  self.  
This  illusion  of singularity  is  so  persuasive  that it has  taken our  most 
sophisticated  scientific  research  and  analysis  to  penetrate.  Each  eye, 
by  itself,  only produces  a two-dimensional  image,  but  when  integrated 
they  produce a new thing that never existed before:  a three-dimensional 
image.  In  much  the  same  way,  each  of  the  two  spheres  of  human 
consciousness  are alone  greatly limited  and inadequate, but when they 
are  integrated,  they  produce  the  fullness  of  human  consciousness:  a 
self-aware  individual.  

These  two  halves  of the  psyche  remain  bound  fully  together  during 
life.  They  are always  dancing  in unison,  and although  one  or the  other 
may seem to have  the upper hand at  any given moment,  both are always 
involved in  the  overall  experience  we  register  at any  given  time.  Thus 
when the  conscious  mind  seems  to  have  full control,  such  as  when  one 
is  most  fully  awake  and  involved  in  logical  thought  calculations,  the 
unconscious  is  still  there  in  the  background,  still  intimately  involved 
in producing  one's  psychological  experience  and mental  processes.  And 
in  the  same  way,  when  one  is  most  deeply  asleep  and  dreaming  and 
the  unconscious  seems  to  be  in  charge,  the  conscious  mind  is  still  also 
present  and  actively  involved  in  producing  one's  experience.  

Embodying the Dichotomy Between Form and Substance 

Ancient  Egyptians  credited  the ka or unconscious  soul with  the  abil
ity to  assume  different  forms,  and  the  nature of the  unconscious  seems 
to  explain  this  as  well:  the  unconscious  excels  at  form  recognition.

158

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

is  designed  to  recognize  the  connections, 
Because  the  unconscious 
relationships,  and  similarities  between  things,  one  of  its  jobs  seems 
to  be  to  recognize  meaningful  patterns within  data.  In  other  words, 
it  seems  to  be  the  half  of  the  mind  that  can  discern  form  (Sagan, 
1977).  The  neuropsychological  studies  of the  last  30  years  show  that 
the  right-brain unconscious  is  far  more  adept  at  recognizing  patterns, 
forms,  connections,  and  relationships  than  the  left-brain  conscious 
(Ornstein,  1997).  Thus  the  classic  philosophical  dichotomy  between 
form  and  substance  also  seems  to  be  embodied  within  the  distinctions 
between  the conscious  and unconscious:  the conscious  is like  an eye  that 
only  recognizes  substance;  the unconscious,  an eye  that only  recognizes 
form.  

Embodying the Dichotomy Between 
Autonomy  and Relationship 

Arthur  Koestler  coined  the  word  "holon" to  refer  to  a  thing  that is 
simultaneously  both a whole  and a part, which,  as he  pointed  out, most 
things  are. Individual  atoms, for example,  are distinct  and autonomous 
wholes  that are,  at the  same  time,  also  mere  parts of molecules,  which 
are themselves  parts of  whole  cells,  which  are  parts of  whole  organs, 
which  are  parts of whole  creatures,  which  are  parts of  whole  families, 
and  so  on.  These  two  different  natures,  wholeness  and  partness,  are 
always  in a  state  of dynamic  conflict:  one  is  concerned  with  preserving 
the  holon's  sense  of  "wholeness,"  its  independent  distinctness  and 
autonomy,  while  the  other  is  concerned  with  preserving  the  holon's 
sense  of  "partness," its  interdependent,  integral  relationship  to  the 
world around it (Wilber,  1999).  

This  functional  dichotomy  of  holons  is  perfectly  reflected  in  the  two 

halves  of the  psyche.  Perfectly  performing the  functions  of "wholeness
orientation,"  the  conscious  mind  tends  to  recognize  the  distinctions 
and  differences  between  things.  The  conscious  mind  tends  to  view 
itself as  independent,  separate,  and autonomous,  complete  unto  itself.  
to  perform  the 
The  unconscious  mind,  on  the  other  hand,  seems 
functions  of "partness-orientation," always  focusing  on  the  similarities 
and relationships between  things.  Thus,  it seems  that the  two  natures 
of holons  have  manifested  in human psyches  as two  distinct spheres  of 
consciousness.  

Every  holon,  Koestler  realized, 

its 
"wholeness"  and  its  "partness" for  its  continued  survival;  if  a  holon 
lost  either  its  distinct  autonomy  or  its  integral  relationship  with  its

is  equally  dependent  on 

PETER NOVAK

159

environment,  it  would  cease  to  exist.  This,  of  course,  has  sobering 
implications  for  the  dividing  soul  doctrines  of  the  ancients,  especially 
since  the  conscious  seems 
to  embody  the  function  of  "preserving 
wholeness,"  and  the  unconscious  seems  to  embody  the  function  of 
"preserving partness." 

The  Unconscious as "The Double" 

The  unconscious  is  receptive,  a  perfect  memory  machine,  forming 
itself into  a flawless  record of all of one's  experiences,  both internal and 
external,  all  one's memories,  thoughts,  deeds,  impressions,  convictions, 
desires,  dreams,  hopes,  loves,  hates,  and so  on  (Jung,  1960).  This  may 
be the  origin of the fact  that so  many cultures,  including those  of Egypt 
and  Persia,  specifically  described  the  unconscious-like  soul  as  being  a 
perfect  double  or image  of the individual.  

The  Conscience Function of the  Unconscious 

Many  early  traditions  (and  Jung  in  the  last  century)  maintained 
that  the  unconscious-like  soul  contained  or  produced  the  conscience, 
an  innate moral  sense  of right  and wrong,  and  the  combination  of two 
of the  unconscious'  chief  characteristics,  responsiveness  and  memory, 
may  explain  how  this  conscience 
function  is  produced.  Whenever 
the  conscious  mind  makes  a  new  choice  or  decision,  the  unconscious 
automatically  reacts  by  comparing  that  latest  choice  or  decision 
with  the  full  gestalt  of  all  that  person's  memories,  all  his  or  her 
previous  thoughts  and  impressions  and  decisions.  Like  a  mirror,  the 
unconscious  forces  us  to  look  back  upon  ourselves  and  our  own  past 
decisions,  conclusions,  perceptions,  and  attitudes.  This  "conscience" 
function  of  the  unconscious  deceives  many  into  assuming  that  the 
unconscious  is  actively  judging our actions  and  decisions  in life;  but in 
reality,  the  unconscious  is,  throughout the  entire  process,  functioning 
automatically,  without  will  or  intent.  The  unconscious  merely  records 
all  our  decisions  and conclusions,  treating them  simply  as  commands 
to  be  followed,  carrying  them  out  as  a  computer  carries  out  its 
programming.  Thus,  if  the  unconscious  contains  the  judgment  that 
a  certain  act  is  "bad," and  a  the  person  does  that  "bad"  thing,  the 
unconscious  will  compare  the  present  act  and  the  previous  judgment 
and generate  corresponding "bad" or guilty  feelings.  Like  a mirror,  the 
unconscious  always  responds  in  kind,  good  for  good  and  bad  for  bad.  
As  described below,  this conscience  function  seems  to be  responsible  for

160

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

the  "judgment" experience  reported  during  some  NDEs,  as well  as the 
heavenly  or hellish  experiences  that may follow.  

Life After Death  Phenomena  and the  Binary 
Soul  Doctrine 

Like  two birds  of golden  plumage,  inseparable  companions, 
the individual  self and the  immortal  self 
are  perched  on the  branches  of the  selfsame  tree.  
The  former tastes  of the  sweet  and  bitter  fruits  of the  tree; 
the  latter,  tasting  of neither,  calmly  observes.  (Prabhavananda and 
Manchester,  1948,  "Mundaka Upanishad") 

As curious as  it is that so  many  ancient cultures  seem  to have known 
about  the  conscious  and  the  unconscious,  it  is  even  more  curious  that 
they all also  agreed that these two souls  separated  at death.  The logical 
question  is:  what would happen to the  conscious  and the unconscious  if 
they did  separate  after  death?  Where  would  they be?  What would  each 
experience?  The  answers  is  that  each  would  lose  what  the  other  half 
gave  it,  and would  be forced  to rely  exclusively  on  its  own capacities.  

The  conscious  half,  then,  would  lose  all  its  memory,  all  its  emotion, 
all  its  subjective  sense  of connectedness  and  relationship,  all  its  sense 
of  pattern  and  context,  everything  it  had  previous  received  from  the 
unconscious.  But  it  would  continue  to  possess  its  own  objective  per
spective,  rational  intellect,  verbal  communication  skills,  and  indepen
dent free will  volition.  On the other hand,  an afterdeath  division  would 
cause  the unconscious  to lose the ability for objective,  rational,  indepen
dent  thought,  its  verbal  communication  skills,  and  its  independent 
free  will ability  to  make  new choices  and  decisions.  It would,  however, 
still  retain  its  subjective  perspective,  emotions,  memory,  and  ability  to 
perceive  patterns,  context,  connectedness,  and relationships.  

Many  of  those  ancient  cultures  held  that  the  conscious-like  soul 
possessing  intelligence  and  free  will  would  reincarnate  after  death, 
while  the  unconscious-like  soul  having  the  emotions  and  the  memory 
would  find  itself in  a  dreamlike  netherworld  experience  after  death.  
These  scenarios  are  uncannily  close  to  what  modern  scientists  would 
predict  as  likely  experiences  if  the  conscious  and  unconscious  did 
separate  after death.  In fact, a division of the conscious and unconscious 
at death  would  account  for the  vast  majority  of reports  emerging  from 
modern  afterlife  research,  including  NDEs,  reincarnation  and  past-life 
regression,  and  apparitions.

PETER NOVAK

161

Two  Stages of NDEs 

According  to  Peter  and  Elizabeth  Fenwick  (1997),  two  stages  of 
experience  are  commonly  reported  in  NDEs,  a  dark  stage  followed 
by  a  light  stage,  and  these  two  stages  seem  to  be  mirror  images  of 
one  another  in  many  respects.  In  the  first  stage,  when  the  individual 
has just  left  the body,  the  experience  is  typically  described  as  floating 
alone within  a black void  or tunnel,  experiencing  perfect calmness  and 
peace,  a loss  of emotional  investment  in one's own past  life,  a loss  of all 
sense  of connection to  anything else,  and often  a  hyperalert  awareness 
with  sharply  enhanced  logic  and  reason.  This  first  phase  of NDEs  is 
often  brief,  sometimes  passing  so  quickly  that  it  is  overlooked  in  the 
transition  to the  more  intense and  sensational  second  stage.  

Conditions  in the second  stage  seem to  be polar opposites  of the  first: 
instead of being in total darkness,  experiencers  are now in brilliant light 
(Moody,  1977).  Instead  of floating  alone  in an empty void,  they now  are 
enveloped  in  a  living universe  filled  with  forms  of all  types.  Instead  of 
being  entirely  unique,  they  are now  interacting  with  many  others  like 
themselves.  Instead of noticing a lack  of emotion,  they now  feel  intense 
emotion,  usually  either the sweetest  of joys  or the bitterest  of miseries.  
Instead  of being  objective,  they  are  now  subjective.  Instead  of feeling 
unconnected  to  anything,  now they  feel  an  intimate  connection  to their 
past  life,  as  well  as  to  those  they  meet  in  this  new  realm,  and  indeed 
to  the  entire  universe.  And  instead  of experiencing  a sharpened  sense 
of  logic  and  reason,  they  now  often  seem  to  exhibit,  though  without 
realizing  it,  a  diminished  tendency  to  exercise  critical  analysis  and 
discriminative  reason.  In short,  the  first stage  seems to be  experienced 
through  the eye  of the conscious  mind,  while  the  second stage  seems to 
be  experienced  through  the  eye of the unconscious  mind.  

Stage One: Peace in the Dark Void.  NDErs  often  describe  stage  one 
as  taking  place  in  an  absolutely  black  nothingness,  a  realm  totally 
devoid  of  forms  or  imagery  of  any  kind.  They  often  find  that  they 
cannot  see  anything,  including  themselves,  in  this  realm  of unending 
emptiness.  A  strange  loss  of emotions  and  a  sense  of disconnectedness 
tends to  take place  during this  stage,  after  leaving the  body but before 
entering  the  realm  of light.  Experiencers  tend  to  characterize  their 
psychological  state  during  this  phase  as  one  of complete  indifference 
and  emotional  detachment;  despite  having just been ripped  from their 
bodies,  as  well  as  their  family,  friends,  loved  ones,  career,  and  plans 
for  the  future,  they  inexplicably  feel  no  distress  or  anxiety  of  any 
kind  over  this  unforseen  development.  On  the  contrary,  NDErs  often

162

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

mention  a  deep  sense  of peacefulness,  calm,  and  serenity  during  this 
phase, all  of which  seems to  point more  towards an  absence  of negative 
emotions  than  the  presence  of any  positive  ones,  in  sharp  contrast  to 
the  second  phase  of NDEs  in  which  experiencers  commonly  describe 
extremely  intense emotions.  The  "peace" of this first stage,  then,  seems 
to  be  the  interpretation  experiencers  give  to  the  sudden  loss  of  all 
subjective  emotion  and  feeling,  understandably  equating  the  total 
absence  of anxiety  and  distress  with  the  presence  of  deep  calm  and 
inner  peace.  Jenny  McMillan's  description  of  this  first  NDE  stage  is  a 
typical  example  of this  phenomenon: 

I  realized  that  I  must  be  dying  and ...  I  didn't  mind  in  the 
least.  I  remember  being  very  interested  in  the  experience 
in  a 
very  unemotional  academic  way  and  feeling  that  it  was  quite  an 
adventure-no  regrets  at  all.... My  husband  and  two-year-old  son 
were  everything  to  me,  and  I  was  shocked  and  amazed  at  myself for 
not  minding  the  thought  of  leaving  them,  yet  I  was  overwhelmed  by 
a  feeling  of  peace....I  knew  how  devastated  they  would  be  at  my 
death  but even  this  did  not  really  move  me.  I... felt  free  of any  cares 
at  all.... It  was just  peaceful  and interesting  and  detached.  (Fenwick 
and  Fenwick,  1997,  pp.  52-53) 

Descriptions  of the first stage  of NDEs  using words  such as  "detached," 
"calm,"  "peaceful,"  "serene,"  "dispassionate,"  "divorced  from  what  was 
happening,"  and "release from care"  are common.  In  fact,  this detached 
calm  state  is  the  single  most  common  experience  in  NDEs,  being 
reported  by  82  percent  of NDErs  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997).  Many 
have  remarked  how  peculiar  this  initial  reaction  seems  to  be,  how 
illogical  that a  person  who  had  lost  everything  most  dear  would  react 
with  a nonchalance.  

Almost  as  common  are  reports  of  increased  clarity  and  swiftness  of 
thought during the first stage.  Experiencers  often mention  a heightened 
sense  of objective  intellect,  feeling more  alert,  curious,  logical, rational, 
and  intelligent  than  normal  (Boldman,  1999;  Fenwick  and  Fenwick, 
1997).  While  NDErs  find  themselves  sharply  interested  in  observing 
what  is  taking  place  during  this  phase,  this  seems  to  be  more  out  of 
dispassionate  academic  curiosity  rather  than  any  sense of attachment 
or  personal  connection  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997).  During  the  first 
stage  of  his  NDE,  Elias  Silver  reported:  "My  mind  seemed  terribly 
clear  and  alert-more  so  than  ever.  I  felt  I  was  all  mind"  (Fenwick 
and Fenwick,  1997,  p.  70).  And Audrey  Organ  declared:  "I... had  great 
mental  awareness.  I had  been given  ...  the  magic key to understanding 
pure  logic"  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997,  p.  74).

PETER NOVAK

163

What  is  being  reported  during  the  first  stage  of  NDEs  seems  to 
be  a  dramatic  reduction  of  subjective  emotion  with  a  corresponding 
increase  in  objective  analytical  logic,  exactly  the  sort  of  experiences 
one would  expect  to be  reported by a  conscious  mind  that had suddenly 
become  divorced  from  its unconscious  half.  Without  the unconscious,  it 
would  feel  that all  its emotions  had disappeared,  it would  no  longer  be 
able  to  appreciate  any  subjective  sense  of personal  connections  of  any 
kind, it  would  experience  utterly  no distress  on any  level of awareness; 
and  because  life  always  contains  some  degree  of  anxiety,  the  sudden 
unanticipated  dropping  away  of  this  angst-ridden  underlying  mental 
context  would  be  experienced  as  a profound state  of peacefulness.  

And  without  the  unconscious,  the  conscious  mind  would  be  unable 
to  recognize  shapes,  patterns,  forms,  or  images  of  any  kind:  it  would 
see  only  nothingness.  On  its  own,  the  conscious  mind  would  have  no 
memory  of  any  forms  or  images,  nor  any  ability  for  form-,  pattern-, 
or relationship-perception.  Without  any  sense  of context,  everything it 
observed  around  it  would  seem  to  be  random  chaos,  and  this  would 
explain  why  experiencers  often  report floating  in  nothingness  during 
the first stage  of NDEs  (as also  do some  persons  hypnotically  regressed 
to  a point in time  between  lives).  

Yet  despite  all  these  lost  abilities,  the  conscious  mind  would  still 
remain fully  conscious  and aware and it would  still  possess  its objective 
rational intellect  and analytical  curiosity,  abilities  that would  seem  to 
enhanced  and  heightened by  virtue  of no  longer being  diluted with the 
unconscious  and its  emotions  and  subjective  impressions.  

In  many  respects,  this  dark emptiness  resembles  the  "Clear Light 
of  the  Void"  mentioned  in  Buddhist  teachings.  Buddhist  tradition 
holds  that  if  one  can  manage  to  stay  in  this  first  stage  and  avoid 
slipping  along  into  the  second  stage  of  NDEs,  one  will  have  achieved 
enlightenment  and  will  no  longer  be  subject  to  reincarnation; but if 
one  does  slip  into  the  second  stage,  Buddhist  doctrine  declares,  one 
will  return to  the  universe  of  form  and  manifestation.  This  dovetails 
nicely  with  the  theory  that  the  first  "dark  void"  stage  of NDEs  is  the 
experience  of the  conscious  and the  second  "realm of light" stage  is  the 
experience  of the unconscious,  for  the unconscious  is  assigned  the  task 
of  form-recognition  in the  human  psyche  (Jung,  1960;  Ornstein,  1997; 
Sagan,  1977)  and  without  the  unconscious  no  form  and  therefore  no 
manifestation  would  be  possible.  Yet  if this  is  so,  one  is  then impelled 
to  question  the  Buddhist  wisdom  of  remaining in  the  dark void,  thus 
remaining ever  divided,  always  experiencing  the  conscious  without the 
unconscious,  always  experiencing  but half of  one's  full  being.

164

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

Stage  Two:  Joy  in  the  Realm  of Light.  The  second  stage  of  NDEs, 
in  which  experiencers  report leaving  the  dark void  usually  to  enter a 
realm  of brilliant living  light,  tends to  be  characterized by  the presence 
of  tremendously  powerful  and  moving  emotions,  deep  emotional 
to  and  investment  in  the  experiencer's  own  past  life 
connection 
through  a life  review,  and  a  suddenly  renewed  and enhanced  sense  of 
connectedness  and  community  with  others  or,  indeed,  with  the  entire 
universe.  

insights,  and  unacknowledged 

These  are  precisely  the  experiences  that scientists  would  predict for 
an  unconscious  that  found  itself  no  longer  united  with  its  conscious 
mind.  Its  experience  of  feeling  and  emotion  would  seem  greatly 
enhanced,  to  the  point  of  seeming  absolute  and  overwhelming.  The 
emotionally  based  mental  input  of  the  unconscious  would,  for  the 
first  time  in  the  person's  experience,  no  longer  be  capable  of  being 
denied,  repressed,  or  rationalized  away  by  the  conscious  mind,  as 
is  always  the  case  to  at  least  some  degree  during  normal  adult 
life.  Unbound  at  last,  all  the  repressed  emotions,  denied  feelings, 
forgotten  memories,  rejected 
self
judgments  that  had  piled  up  within  the  unconscious  over  the  course 
of  the  person's  life  would  spring  forth,  finally  free  of  the  restrictive, 
repressive,  and  controlling  influence  of  the  conscious  mind.  The 
natural characteristics of the  unconscious,  including  emotion,  memory, 
conscience,  receptiveness,  responsiveness,  aesthetic  awareness,  and 
form-,  pattern-, and relationship-recognition,  would  define  the  nature 
of  the  experience.  But  experiencers  in  the  second  stage  would  also 
exhibit  a  pronounced  loss  of  certain  abilities  that  correspond  to  the 
characteristics  of  the  conscious  mind.  Without  the  conscious  mind, 
the  unconscious  would 
lose  its  reason,  logic,  objective  perspective, 
free  will,  and  verbal  communication  ability.  No  longer  having  any 
critical,  analytical,  or discriminative  faculties  whatsoever,  it would  be 
condemned  to  accept  as  unquestionable  truth virtually  all  thoughts, 
suspicions,  and  impressions  passing  across  the  mind's  eye.  Without 
its  verbal  ability,  communication  would  have  to  take  place  without 
words,  instead  using  gestures,  symbols,  metaphors,  analogies,  and 
direct  intuitive  awareness.  Without  the  conscious  mind's  objective 
perspective,  one  would  have  a  diminished  sense  of  one's  own  distinct 
independence,  autonomy,  and  unique  identity;  the  normal  defining 
boundaries  between  oneself  and  others  would  seem  diminished,  even 
nonexistent.  These  are precisely  what most  experiencers  report during 
the  second  stage  of NDEs.

PETER NOVAK

165

Increased Emotion.  The first thing that seems to be  noticed about the 
second  stage  is the intense flood  of feelings  and  emotions  that instantly 
envelop  NDErs;  most  reports  describe  extremely  positive  emotions, 
such  as  love  and  joy,  but  occasionally  extremely  negative  feelings  are 
reported.  Experiencers  do  not seem  to report that  they felt just "a little 
bit good" or "a little bit bad";  the feelings  experienced  during the  second 
stage of NDEs always  seem to be at extreme, maximum  levels (Atwater, 
1994).  

This  is  precisely  what  one  would  expect  if  the  unconscious  was 
operating  independently  of the  conscious  mind.  Without  the  conscious 
mind,  the  unconscious  would  no  longer  possess  any  discriminative 
capacity;  it would no  longer  be  able  to distinguish  differences  between 
things  or appreciate  degrees of difference.  The unconscious  is designed 
to perceive  the similarities between  things, not the differences,  and  so is 
constitutionally blind to degrees of difference.  So if the unconscious  was 
experiencing  fear,  it would know  that fear in its  purest,  most absolute, 
and  undiluted  form.  Similarly,  if the  unconscious  felt  love,  that  love 
would  be  experienced  as  infinite  and  unlimited.  And  that is  precisely 
the  character  of the  emotions  that  NDErs  tend  to  report  during  the 
second  stage  of these  episodes.  

Diminished  Reason.  If  the  unconscious  was  divorced  from  the 
conscious  mind, it would no longer possess  any logical reasoning  ability, 
and  second  stage reports  often  suggest a lack  of normal  deductive  logic 
and  analytical  reason  in  experiencers'  thought  processes.  Without  the 
conscious,  the unconscious would have no objectivity, which  would mean 
an inability  to tell  the difference  between  truth and falsehood.  Without 
the  objective  conscious,  no  doubt  can  be  experienced.  The  objective 
conscious  mind  discerns  differences  and  distinguishes  between  them, 
accepting  one  thing  while  rejecting  another.  But  without  the  logic 
and  objectivity  of  the  conscious  mind,  all  thoughts  running  across 
the  screen  of  the  unconscious  mind  would  be  accepted  equally,  each 
impression  seeming  to  be  equally  obvious,  compelling,  and  true.  And 
this is precisely the dynamic that seems to take  place during the second 
stage  of NDEs.  

Absolute  Knowledge.  NDErs  regularly  report  an  experience  that 
seems  to  be  direct  and  certain  knowing  (Atwater,  1994);  information 
received 
to  be  100  percent  certain, 
despite  having  in  no  way  been  questioned,  measured,  analyzed,  or 
independently  verified  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997).  This  attribution

in  this  way  is  always  felt 

166

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

of  certainty  to  one's  perceptions  is  exactly  the  way  the  unconscious 
processes  information.  It  does  not  critique,  analyze,  or  question  it, 
but  accepts  it  without  dispute  or  hesitation  as  absolute  and  obvious 
truth. When  we  dream  that we  can  fly  or  that we  are walking  naked 
into  our  place  of  business,  we  do  not  during  the  dream  question  the 
reality  of  these  impressions,  for  there  is  no  logic  available  in  our 
thought  processes  at  the  time,  no  discriminative  capacity  to  raise 
doubts.  

In  much  the  same  way,  NDErs  during  the  second  stage  regularly 
entertain  thoughts  and  impressions  that  are  never  questioned.  Yet 
later,  when  objective  logic  is  brought  to  bear  upon  these  insights,  one 
finds  that  some  NDE  reports  contradict  others.  Some  NDErs  insist, 
for  example,  that they  received  the  "divine  truth" that reincarnation 
is  a false  teaching  (Eadie  and Taylor,  1992),  while  others  return from 
their  NDEs  carrying  the  opposite  message  (Atwater,  1994).  Similar 
contradictions  have  occurred  over  other  issues  as  well,  such  as  the 
existence  of the  devil  (Fenwick  and Fenwick,  1997;  Williams,  1999).  

This  loss  of one's critical and analytical  functions  also  seems  evident 
in  reports  of  addictive  behavior  during  the  second  stage  of  NDEs.  
Inhabitants of second  stage  realms seem  to  remain frozen  in whatever 
behavior  patterns they held  at the  times  of their deaths.  Even  though 
they  no  longer  possess  physical  bodies,  they  still  seek  to  satisfy  their 
physical  cravings,  seemingly  unable  to  grasp the  simple  fact  that these 
cravings  can  no  longer  be  satisfied  (Lundahl  and  Widdison,  1997).  
Furthermore, there are abundant reports of the recently deceased  being 
unable  to  grasp  that  they  are  dead,  despite  an  abundance  of  clues 
(Brown,  1999;  Guiley,  1992;  Monroe.  1994;  Van  Praagh,  1999).  The 
living  no longer  hear  or see  them,  and their spirit bodies  pass  through 
the  physical  objects  they  try  to  grasp  and  the  loved  ones  they  try 
to  embrace;  yet,  despite  all  this  rather  compelling  evidence,  they 
remain befuddled,  seemingly  unable  to realize  they  are dead.  This  loss 
of  analytical  reasoning  ability  is  perhaps  most  obvious  in  accounts 
of the  less  commonly  reported second  stage  world,  the  hellish  Realm  of 
Bewildered  Souls  (addressed in  greater depth below).  The  inhabitants 
of this  gray  netherworld have  repeatedly  been  described  as  trapped in 
unpleasant  conditions  of  their own  making,  which  they  could  escape 
easily  if  only  they  tried.  Yet  they  do  not  try  (Moody,  1977),  nor  do 
they  seem  to  grasp  the  fact  that  they  could  end  their  misery  in  a 
moment  if  only  they  tried.  Such  behavior  points  strongly  to  a  loss 
of  rational  intellect,  possibly  coupled  with  a  lack  of  independent 
free  will.

PETER NOVAK

167

Increased Sense of Connections and Relationships.  NDErs commonly 
report  feeling  a  profound  sense  of  oneness  with  the  whole  universe 
(Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997),  and  this  too  is  what  one  would  expect 
if  the  unconscious  was  operating  independently  of  the  conscious 
mind.  The  unconscious  is  geared  to  recognize  the  connections  and 
relationships  between  things,  and  the  patterns  those  relationships 
form.  Seeing  only  connections  but  never  any  differences,  the  uncon
scious would  see the  whole universe  as  a perfectly interconnected,  syn
chronized,  and  harmonized  singularity.  

This  is  the  way  the  unconscious  processes  information,  and  the 
effects  of this  natural  process  can  easily be  observed  in  dreams,  where 
identities  of multiple  individuals  and blurred  and  melded  into  a  single 
dream  character  (Freud,  1965/1932);  it  would  be  nothing  unusual  for 
one's  Uncle  Arthur  to also  seem to be  one's high  school  Spanish teacher 
in  a  dream,  even  though  in  real  life  they  had  been  entirely  distinct 
individuals.  In  normal  life  the  conscious  and  unconscious  operate 
together,  one  pointing  out  the  differences  between  things,  the  other 
highlighting  their  similarities;  only  together  can  they provide  us  with 
a  balanced  and  realistic  perspective.  But  without  the  distinguishing, 
objective  perspective  of the  conscious  mind,  the  unconscious  is  blind to 
all  distinctions,  divisions,  and  inequities.  On  its  own,  the  unconscious 
would  be  unable  to  distinguish  between  oneself  and  the  rest  of  the 
universe,  and  would  meld  the  two  together  ("I  and  the  universe  are 
one")  by  the  same  inner  programming  that  causes  separate  identities 
to  blend  together  in  dreams.  

Diminished Appreciation of Objectivity.  Just  as  the  unconscious  is 
polarized  more  towards  the  subjective  than  the  objective,  so  too  the 
reports  from  NDErs  seem  to  emphasize  and  appreciate  subjective 
interpersonal  values  such  as  personal  relationships,  family, 
love, 
and  patience,  while  de-emphasizing  more  objective  values,  such  as 
worldly  and  professional  accomplishment.  In  the  "real"  world  both 
are  inescapably  interconnected.  Yet  we  repeatedly  hear  in  the  life 
reviews  of  NDErs  that  their  subjective  emotion-based  relationships 
with  others  are  accorded  far  more  meaning  and  significance  than 
their objective  worldly accomplishments,  which,  as  one  NDEr reported, 
"meant nothing in this  setting"  (Lundahl  and Widdison,  1997,  p.  263).  

Increased Receptivity  and  Inclusiveness.  Because  the  unconscious 
does  not have  any  ability  for  perceiving  details  or  distinguishing  the 
differences  between  things,  it  must  accept  all  thoughts  equally.  If it 
was operating  independently  of the conscious  mind as  the  Binary  Soul

168

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

Doctrine  suggests  would  be  the  case,  the  right brain unconscious  would 
find itself in a state of complete  and total acceptance,  rejecting  nothing: 
"The right hemisphere  has no equivalent  of no" (Ornstein,  1997,  p.  93).  
This is precisely  the mindset  found  to be  in operation  in most  reports 
of  the  second  stage  of  NDEs.  All  people  are  loved  and  appreciated 
and  accepted  equally,  with  none  being  rejected.  Even  during the  life 
review,  when  all  one's  worst  thoughts  and  deeds  are  displayed,  the 
experiencer  still  feels  loved  and  accepted  unconditionally  (Atwater, 
1994).  The unconscious  must accept  everyone  and everything,  without 
regard to  its objective  value  and worth, due  to the way  the unconscious 
is  designed  to function.  

Diminished Separateness and  Autonomy.  If  the  unconscious  was 
divorced  from  the  conscious,  one  would  also  expect  to  see  a  lessening 
of  one's  sense  of  the  distinctions  between  all  things,  including  the 
distinctions  between  one  person  and  another,  and this  too  is  a  regular 
feature  of  the second  stage  of NDEs.  Experiencers  consistently  report 
that the normal boundaries between  themselves  and others have  faded, 
in  some  cases  becoming  nearly  nonexistent  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick, 
1997).  Instead  of  retaining  their  autonomy,  they  find  now  that  their 
very  psyches  have  become  like  a  glass  house  into  which  anyone  and 
everyone  can  peer at  will.  All  their thoughts  and feelings  are  exposed 
to  the  universe,  and  nothing is  hidden  (Moody,  1977):  "I had  no  sense 
of being  separate.  I  was  in the light and one  with it" (Grey,  1985,  p.  58).  
In the  second  stage,  there  no  longer  seems  to  be  any  separateness, 
which  is  what  one  would  expect  to  experience  if the  conscious  mind, 
which  provides  our  ability  to  perceive  separateness  and  distinctness, 
was  no  longer  functioning.  

Increased Aesthetic  Sensitivity.  The right brain unconscious,  accord
ing  to  modern  neuropsychologists, 
is  oriented  towards  recognizing 
and  appreciating life's  more  artistic and  aesthetic  qualities  (Ornstein, 
1997).  Because  of  this  orientation,  if the  unconscious  was  separated 
from  the  conscious  mind,  its  aesthetic  appreciation  and  artistic 
sensitivities  would  seem  greatly  magnified.  This  is  consistent  with 
the  reports  of  second  stage  NDEs.  Descriptions  of  the  realm  of  light 
usually  include  descriptions  of  incredibly  beauty.  Whether the  subject 
of discussion  happens  to be  the  buildings,  the  natural scenery,  or even 
the  inhabitants  of  the  realm  of light,  they  are  always  too  beautiful 
for words,  which  is what would  be  expected  if one's  aesthetic  sense  was 
enhanced.  In much the  same  way,  observers  of the Realm  of Bewildered 
Spirits also  experience  a similar  intensification  of their aesthetic  sense

PETER NOVAK

169

in  the  opposite  direction.  Instead  of  everything  seeming  impossibly 
beautiful,  everything  in  that  realm  seems  to  be  impossibly  ugly  or 
horrific (Lundahl and Widdison,  1997).  Either way,  the  aesthetic  sense 
of the  observer in the  second  stage  seems  to be  registering at maximum 
capacity.  

Diminished Verbal  Capacity.  If the  unconscious  became  alienated 
from  the  conscious  mind,  it  would  lose  all  ability  for  linear  thought, 
and  thus  all  ability  to  communicate  verbally.  Again,  the  weight  of 
the  reports  suggests  that  verbal  communication  ability  is  greatly 
diminished  during  NDEs.  Words  are  seldom  used  during the  second 
stage  of the  experience,  communication  more  often  occurring  through 
gestures,  images,  and  direct  intuitive  comprehension  (Moody,  1977).  
And  even  long after the  NDE  is  over,  words  seem  hopelessly  inadequate 
to  describe  the experience.  The ineffability  of the  second  stage  of NDEs 
is  a common  finding; researchers have  encountered  comments  like  "no 
words  were  spoken,"  "words were  not  necessary,"  and "the feeling  was 
indescribable," and the life  review  is  "more often in  the  form of pictures 
than verbal  memories"  (Fenwick  and Fenwick,  1997,  p.  116).  

Increased Sense  of Form  and Pattern.  The  fact  that  the  conscious 
mind  has no  capacity  for  perceiving  form  while  the  unconscious  does 
explains  why  the  first  stage  of  NDEs  includes  no  perception  of  any 
forms,  including  one's  own  self  (Boldman,  1999),  while  the  second 
stage  is  filled  with  forms  of  all  sorts.  But  the  form  perception  of 
the  unconscious  would  also  seem  to  be  responsible  for  another  very 
notable  characteristic  of  the  second  stage:  the  feeling  that  one  has 
"total understanding," perceiving  the  full  scheme  of  things  (Fenwick 
and Fenwick,  1997):  "Everything fitted in, it all  made sense....  It almost 
seemed,  too,  as  if the  pieces  of  a jig-saw  all  fitted  together.  You  know 
how  it is  with  a  tapestry  and all  the  interwoven  parts,  then  when  the 
tapestry's  turned over  you  see  how  it  all  fits  in  place"  (Ring,  1980, 
p.  183).  NDErs  often  return with  claims  of  seeing  "the big  picture," 
instantly  understanding  the  grand  scheme  of  reality,  understanding 
how  all  the  pieces  to  the  puzzle  of  reality  all  fit  together.  This  would 
seem  to be  form and pattern awareness  on  the  grandest scale.  

Diminished Memory  of NDE Revelations.  While  the  unconscious  is 
the  repository  of  memory,  such  memories  are  primarily  the  records 
of  the  data  it  receives  from  the  conscious  mind  while  the  person  was 
awake.  The unconscious  fares  far worse  at retaining memory  of its own 
activity  than  it  does  at  retaining  the  memory  of  what  the  conscious

170

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

mind  experiences;  the  memory  of  what  one  did  while  awake  is  far 
more  readily  accessible  than  the  memories  of  what  one  dreams  at 
night.  And  while  the  unconscious  is  always  active,  always  busy  with 
its  own  tasks,  one  generally  has  no  memory  of  this  activity  of  the 
unconscious.  In much  the same  way  that one  has trouble  remembering 
these  activities  of the  unconscious,  NDErs  report similar memory  loss 
of  second  stage  experiences.  Again  and  again,  NDErs  have  reported 
that  momentous  insights  and  revelations  were  received  during  the 
experience  ("All  knowledge  was  given  to  me"),  but  upon  returning to 
normal consciousness,  these  invaluable  data are entirely  missing  from 
memory  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997).  As  is  so  often  the  case  with 
dream memories,  one  is  left  with  very  strong  and  compelling  feelings 
and impressions,  but very  little  specific  detail.  This  would  make  sense 
from  the  perspective  of the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine;  second  stage  NDE 
memories  would  behave  like  dream memories  if both  experiences  had 
originated from  the  unconscious.  

The  Life  Review. 

If the  unconscious  found  itself  separated from  the 
conscious  mind,  it  would  seem  likely  to  experience  a  full  life  review 
much  like  that  reported  by  NDErs.  Without  the  conscious  mind,  it 
would  no  longer  be  possible  for  the  emotionally  based  mental  input  of 
the  unconscious  to  be  denied,  repressed,  or  rationalized  in  any  way.  
As  described  above,  unbound  at  last,  all  the  forgotten  memories  that 
had  built  up  within  the  unconscious  over  the  course  of  the  person's 
life  would  spring  forth,  finally  free  of  the  restrictive  and  repressive 
influence  of the  conscious  mind.  

The  conscious  mind  is the  half of the  psyche  that  holds  the  power  of 
autonomous  volition,  the  power  to  decide  and  choose.  Without  that 
conscious  mind,  the  unconscious  could  not  choose  to  do  anything, 
and  would  find  itself  totally  unable  to  initiate  change  in  any  way.  It 
would  have  nothing  to  do  but fall  back  deeper  and deeper  into its  own 
emotions  and memories.  Being  cut off from its own  conscious  mind,  the 
unconscious  would  be  completely  nonreasoning,  emotional,  subjective, 
and  inward-looking;  it  would  encounter  its  own  memories,  including 
its  own  long-forgotten  or  never  fully  acknowledged  feelings  and  self
judgments  about those  memories.  

While  people  are  alive,  their unconscious  minds  remain  constantly 
active,  constantly  reacting to  all  their conscious  choices  and decisions, 
constantly comparing  those  choices  and decisions  with one's  own  inner 
sense  of  right  and  wrong.  But,  at  least  while  a  person  is  still  alive, 
one  can  choose  consciously  to  block  out those  "nagging whisperings"  of

PETER NOVAK

171

the  unconscious  soul.  People  can,  and often  do,  choose  to  ignore  them, 
pushing  these  messages  out of  awareness  (Freud,  1965/1932).  

But if  our  unconscious  found  itself  cut  off from  the  conscious  mind 
after  death,  that  conscious  mind  would  no  longer  be  there  to  repress 
memories,  feelings,  and  self-judgments.  One  would  no  longer  be  able 
to  hide  from  those  judgments,  but  would  suddenly  find  oneself  face 
to  face  with  a  lifetimes'  worth  of  repressed  self-judgments.  With  no 
discriminating intellect,  one  could  no longer ignore,  deny,  or rationalize 
those  memories,  feelings,  and judgments.  This  dynamic  would  explain 
the  sudden,  immediate,  and  total  life  review  and  self-judgment  that 
often  occurs  during the  second  stage  of NDEs.  Just as the  Binary  Soul 
Doctrine  would  predict,  these  life  reviews  occur  suddenly  during  the 
second  stage  of  the  NDE,  simultaneously  releasing  into  full  view  all 
the  memories of one's life  experiences,  even  one's  most private thoughts 
and feelings.  

The  Self-Judgment.  The  judgment  that  occurs  during  this  review 
is  most  typically  experienced  as  being  a  self-judgment  rather than  a 
judgment  by  a  second  party  (Moody,  1977),  just  as  the  Binary  Soul 
Doctrine  would  anticipate.  The dynamics  of human psychology  suggest 
that this judgment,  although  experienced  during the  NDE,  would  not 
actually  have  its  origins  in  that moment,  although  it  might  seem  so 
at the  time.  Rather, during the  flood  of memories,  one  would  suddenly 
realize  that  one's  own  unconscious  mind  had been  reactively  judging 
one's  choices  and actions  all  along,  during every  moment  of  one's  life.  
During the life  review,  one  would  finally  come  face  to face  with the  sum 
total  of  all  those  past  judgments  about  one's  own  behavior  that one's 
own  unconscious  had generated over  the course  of one's life,  judgments 
that were  originally  refused  recognition  by the  conscious  mind.  People 
tend to keep  many such  self-judgments  repressed,  never allowing  them 
to  enter into  their conscious  awareness  during life,  causing  these  self
judgments  to  build  up  over  the  years.  But  after  death,  when  the 
repressive  conscious  mind was  taken  away,  all  those judgments  would 
logjam  to  rise  to  the 
be  unbound,  allowing  the  entire  psychological 
surface  of  one's  awareness  in  a  single  great  convulsion,  finally  being 
acknowledged.  This  would  explain  why  the  life  review,  which  makes 
all  these  unconscious  thoughts,  feelings,  and  self-judgments  starkly 
apparent,  often  makes  people  feel  as  if they  have  finally  been  revealed 
to  themselves  as they  truly  are for the  first time  (Boldman,  1999).  This 
sense  of having  been  "exposed" is  a common  theme  in  the second  phase 
of NDEs;  stripped of all one's illusions,  denials,  and self-deceptions,  one

172

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

feels  unaccustomedly  exposed  to  oneself,  as  well  as  to  others  (Moody, 
1977).  

Increased Reactiveness: Heaven  and Hell.  If  those  memories,  feel
ings,  and  judgments  were  primarily  positive,  the  unconscious,  being 
responsive  and  emotional,  would  respond  to  them  by  generating 
positive  feelings  and  emotions.  Since  the  unconscious  is  also  creative, 
constantly  generating  images,  dreams,  and  fantasies,  the  unconscious 
could  then  be  expected  to  create  images,  dreams,  and  fantasies  to 
give  shape  to  those  feelings,  emotions,  and  self-judgments.  If  those 
memories,  feelings,  and  self-judgments  were  primarily  positive,  it 
would  generate  positive  images,  dreams,  and  fantasies  to  give  them 
shape  and  manifestation.  And  if  the  unconscious  was  in  a  truly 
closed  system,  completely  cut  off from  its  conscious  half  such  that  no 
decision-making  ability  was  available,  this  process  would  be  likely  to 
continue  forever.  The  good  feelings  and  dream  images  generated  by 
the  unconscious  would  grow  ever  stronger  and  more  intense,  and  in 
the  unconscious'  self-manufactured  dreamworld,  it  would  experience 
itself to  be  in  heaven.  But if those  memories,  feelings,  and  judgments 
were  negative,  the  unconscious  would then  generate  negative  feelings, 
a  process  which  would  also  continue  and  compound,  becoming  ever 
stronger and more  intense,  and in that unconscious'  self-manufactured 
dreamworld  reality,  it would feel  itself to be  in hell.  

Caught  in  a  circular  pattern  of  automatic  behavior,  such  an 
unconscious  soul would  review its memories,  react  to them emotionally, 
and  react  to  those  reactions  emotionally  as  well,  all  automatically.  
This  process,  however,  would  not  necessarily  seem  to  occur  slowly  or 
sequentially,  since  time  does  not  appear  to  function  normally  during 
NDEs  (Moody,  1977).  Instead,  this  entire  process  would  seem  to  occur 
instantaneously,  moving  directly  from  the  life  review  to  experiencing 
the  heaven  or  hellish  dreamworld,  without  any  sense  of the  psycho
logical  processes  that  led  from  the  one  to  the  other.  These  predictable 
processes,  based  on  nothing more  esoteric  than the  findings  of modern 
scientists  about  the  nature  and  workings  of  the  human  psyche, 
duplicate  the  classic  afterlife  scenario  of an  eternal  heaven  and  hell 
constantly  becoming  ever  more  intensely  felt  and  experienced.  The 
pains  of hell would  grow  ever  more  horrible,  the  bliss  of heaven,  ever 
more  delicious.  

The  "Realm of Bewildered Spirits." Many  researchers  have  described 
a  gray  or  hellish  version  of the  second-stage  NDE  realm  inhabited  by 
bewildered,  confused, and distressed  souls (Atwater,  1994; Fenwick  and

PETER NOVAK

173

Fenwick,  1997;  Lundahl  and  Widdison,  1997;  Moody,  1977;  Steiger, 
1996).  These  souls  display  the  characteristics  one  would  expect  of 
separated  unconscious  souls that no longer have access  to their rational 
conscious  minds.  Unconscious  and  unaware,  these  beings  possess 
extremely  low  intelligence  and  vitality,  appearing  "washed  out,  dull, 
gray"  (Moody,  1977,  p.  19),  dreary,  and  confused.  These  "Bewildered 
Spirits"  show  no  intellectual  curiosity  about  where  they  are,  nor  any 
inclination  for  communication,  being  entirely  caught  up  in  their  own 
emotional  misery  (Lundahl  and  Widdison,  1997)  and  unaware  of the 
presence  of others  (Moody,  1977).  George  Gallup  and  William  Proctor 
(1982)  described  a  similar  picture  of  these  beings  suffering  intense 
emotional unrest compounded by thick confusion.  Have the souls  in this 
realm  lost  all access  to  their own  conscious  minds?  At  least one  NDEr 
described  his  own  conscious  mind  as  too  deeply  buried  within  for him 
to  access  it during  a hellish  experience  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997).  
The  ghostlike  souls  in  this  gray  realm  seem  to  be  trapped  in  easily 
escapable  misfortunes  (Moody,  1977),  situations  that they could  escape 
easily if only they tried  (Lundahl  and Widdison,  1997).  But they do not 
try,  and  furthermore,  they  cannot  seem  to  understand  that  they  could 
escape  if  only  they  would  try.  The  inhabitants  of this  realm  seem  so 
utterly  convinced  that  there  is  no  way  for  them  to  escape  that  they 
do  not  even  try  to  look  for  one  (Lundahl  and  Widdison,  1997).  This 
strongly  suggests  the  absence  of  the  conscious  human  spirit  during 
these experiences;  during normal  human life,  no matter  how  desperate 
the  situation,  the  indomitable  will  of the  human  spirit  refuses  to  give 
up  entirely.  But in  the gray  realm  of the  bewildered,  where  freedom  is 
apparently  right  at hand,  that  indomitable  will  of the  human  spirit  is 
nowhere  to  be  seen.  Such  behavior  suggests  a scenario  consistent  with 
the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine:  beings with a  complete  absence  of indendent 
free will  and  rational  intellect.  

The  heavenly  and  hellish  realms  visited  during  the  second  stage 
of NDEs  seem,  despite  first  appearances,  to  have  much  in  common.  In 
both, emotions and credulousness  predominate  while  reason  and verbal 
expression  seem diminished.  In the realm of light,  communication  often 
takes  place  using  gestures,  symbols,  and  direct  mental  comprehension 
instead  of words;  whereas  in  the  hellish  realm,  communication  often 
seems to be absent  entirely (Lundahl  and Widdison,  1997).  Both experi
ences  are often  described  as ineffable  (Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997).  

NDErs  have  described  what  seem  to  be  two  very  different  per
spectives  of the  hellish  realm,  one  seen  from  the  inside,  and  a  very 
different  one seen  from  the outside.  Descriptions  from inside the  Realm

174

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

of Bewildered  Souls  can  be  acutely  frightening,  with  horrifying  visual 
imagery  (Fenwick and  Fenwick,  1997);  but descriptions  of this  place  as 
seen  from the  outside  never  seem  to include  this  nightmarish  imagery.  
Instead,  NDErs  in  the  realm  of light  who  find  they  can  peer  into  the 
Realm  of Bewildered  Souls  describe  this  realm  simply  as  being  gray, 
dreary,  and  dull  (Moody,  1977),  but  then  paradoxically  describe  the 
inhabitants  of that  realm  as  experiencing  sharp  emotional  distress, 
"wailing  and  full  of  desperation"  (Lundahl  and  Widdison,  1997), 
emotions  that  seem  strikingly  incongruous  with  the  bland  dullness 
of their  apparent  surroundings.  It is  as if the  inhabitants  of this realm 
are  entrapped in their own private dream  fantasies,  which  causes them 
to  experience  these  intensely  distressing  emotions;  whereas  observers 
watching  from the realm of light cannot  see those  privately experienced 
fantasies,  but  only  perceive  the  anguished  emotions  experienced  by 
those  bewildered  souls.  

Raymond  Moody  (1977)  noted  that  these  bewildered  dead  did  not 
seem  to  be  aware  of  anything,  either  in  the  physical  world  or  the 
spiritual  world,  but  only  shuffled  about,  each  experiencing  its  own 
dreadful  emotions.  However,  NDErs  observing  the  bewildered  souls 
from  outside  were  using  an  objective  perspective,  which  suggests  that 
the  division  of objective  conscious  and  subjective  unconscious  was  not 
a  full  and  total  separation,  in  which  they  would  have  been  unable  to 
view  anything objectively  at all.  

Metaphorical Descriptions. If one  acknowledges  the  preponderance 
of  parallels  between  the  descriptions  of  second-stage  NDEs  and 
the  characteristics  of  the  right  brain  unconscious,  one  is  forced  to 
consider  the  possibility  that  the  entire  second  stage  of  the  classic 
NDE  is  experienced  solely  by  the  unconscious  while  it  is  in  a  state 
of  dissociation  from  the  conscious  mind.  If  so,  this  would  require 
one  to  reevaluate  the  second  stage  "realm  of light"  descriptions,  for 
the  unconscious  does  not  process  or  relate  information  the  way  the 
conscious  mind  does.  The  unconscious  is  not  literal,  logical,  linear, 
or  rational.  It  does  not  think  or  communicate  the  way  the  conscious 
mind does,  and  knowing this,  one cannot  accept  its communications  at 
face  value  the  way  one  does  with  communications  from  the  conscious 
mind,  which  is  literal,  logical,  and  rational.  Instead,  the  unconscious 
mind  thinks  and  communicates  with  metaphors,  symbols,  images, 
gestures,  and  so  on,  and  any communication  or input  coming  from  the 
unconscious  must  be viewed  as  such.  

Dreams  are  communications 

the  unconscious,  messages 
generated  within  the  unconscious  to  be  released  into  our  conscious

from 

PETER NOVAK

175

the  world's  great  myths 
awareness  (Freud,  1965/1932),  as  are 
(Campbell,  1949).  Both  dreams  and  myths  follow  the  same  laws,  the 
same  rules  of operation  in  effect  within  the  unconscious:  they  do  not 
paint  a  literal  picture  of  what  they  are  trying  to  communicate,  but 
instead take  a nonlinear route, relating their message  using metaphors, 
images,  gestures,  and  so  on.  If,  as  the  evidence 
analogies,  symbols, 
suggests,  the  second  stage  of  NDEs  is  experienced  exclusively  by  the 
unconscious  half of  the  psyche,  its  descriptions  of those  experiences
the mental  image of the experience  that the  conscious  mind is left with 
after  the  experience  itself is  over-should  then be  viewed  in  much  the 
same  way  people  view  dreams  and myths,  as messages  that should  not 
be  taken  literally,  but which  must be  translated  and interpreted  before 
they  can be  fully  comprehended.  

NDEs as Evidence of Division of Conscious From  Unconscious.  The 
two stages of NDEs reflect the two halves of the human psyche,  the dark 
stage  bringing the  enhancement  of the  characteristics  of the  conscious 
mind  and  the  diminishment  of  those  of  the  unconscious,  while  the 
light  stage  does  the  exact  opposite.  The  dark  stage  brings  a  decrease 
in  emotion,  connectedness,  form  perception,  and  subjectivity,  and  an 
increase in autonomy, logic, reason, and objectivity,  while the light stage 
brings  the exact  opposite.  

An  argument  could  even  be  made  that the  dark  stage  also  includes 
some  memory  loss:  remembering  no  wants  and needs,  one  experiences 
oneself  as  having  no  wants,  needs,  or  addictions  in  the  dark  stage 
(Fenwick  and  Fenwick,  1997).  The  light  stage  brings  an  increase  in 
memory,  and as  this would  of course  include  the  memories  of all  one's 
earthly  wants,  needs,  and  addictions,  one  would  experience  oneself  as 
still  having all those  wants,  needs,  and  addictions.  

There  also  seems  to  be  some  noticeable  diminishment  of free  will 
in  the  light  stage:  those  still  obsessed  with  desires  for  food,  drink, 
sex,  or  other  addictions  find  themselves  unable  to  break  free  of those 
yearnings  even  though  they  find  themselves  no  longer  able  to  satisfy 
them  (Lundahl  and  Widdison,  1997).  Such  a diminishment  of free  will 
would  be  consistent  with  such  a  division,  for  the  conscious  mind  holds 
the  free  will,  and  on  its  own,  the  unconscious  would  not.  On  its  own, 
the  unconscious  could  never  choose  to  change  its behavior  patterns;  it 
could  never  even  grasp  the  fact  that  these  behaviors  were  no  longer 
capable  of leading to  fulfillment.  

Detail  after  detail  suggests  that  the  two  halves  of  the  psyche  are 
operating  independently  of one  another  during  these  two  stages,  as  if 
they  were,  just  as  the  ancients  believed,  in  the  process  of  splitting

176

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

apart  from  one  another  in  the  moments  after  physical  death.  But 
such  a splitting  is  not what  most NDErs  report,  nor  what  they believe 
themselves  to  be  experiencing during these  episodes.  Their  impression, 
rather,  is  that these  two  stages,  the  dark and  the  light,  occur  one  after 
the  other,  in  the  normal  continuous  progression  of moments  in  time: 
first comes  the  black  stage,  and  then the  light  stage  follows  it,  as  time 
normally operates (Fenwick and  Fenwick,  1997).  Yet NDErs themselves 
contradict  this  interpretation,  consistently  insisting  that  time  is  not 
experienced  normally  during  NDEs.  In  fact,  again  and  again  reports 
declare  that "time as we  know it" does  not  exist during NDEs  (Fenwick 
and Fenwick,  1997).  If so,  then the  black  stage  and  the  light stage  may 
not  necessarily  be  arranged  in  the  assumed  time  sequence,  but  both 
may  in  fact  be  occurring  at  the  same  time  but  independently  of one 
another,  just as  the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine  suggests.  

If  the  conscious  and  unconscious  do  split  apart  from  one  another 
during  NDEs,  why  is  this  not  reported?  Perhaps  because  if  such  a 
division  did  occur,  neither  side  would  realize  it.  Most  people  do  not 
even  realize  that  they  have  two  parts.  But  more  importantly,  the 
nature  of the  two  halves  would  completely  mask  any  such  division 
that  occurred.  The  conscious  mind,  stripped  of  its  memory,  would  not 
remember  that anything  had ever been any different,  and so,  possessing 
the  reason  but  lacking  the  necessary  data  from  which  it  could  draw 
conclusions,  it would never become conscious of the change.  Meanwhile, 
the  unconscious  mind  would  see  the  signs,  but  could  not  read  them; 
still holding the  memory but now  stripped of its reasoning  abilities,  the 
unconscious  would  be  unable  to  analyze  the  data  and  figure  out  that 
anything had  changed.  

It  seems  clear,  then,  that  much  of  the  data  emerging  from  NDE 
research  is  consistent  with  the  ancient  world's  conviction  that  the 
conscious  and  unconscious  can  and  often  do separate  from  one another 
at  death.  But  NDEs  are  not  the  only  afterlife  phenomena  that  seems 
to  reflect  such an afterdeath  division;  many other categories  of afterlife 
phenomena  also  seem  to  carry  similarly  compelling  indications  of such 
a mental rupture.  

The Netherworld of Ancient Myth 

If the  conscious  and  unconscious  both  survived  physical  death  but 
separated  from  each  other  in  the  process,  the  unconscious  would 
encounter predictable  conditions.  It would feel  cold,  hungry,  and empty, 
lacking  the  vibrant  and  fulfilling  presence  of  its  conscious  mind;  it

PETER NOVAK

177

would  become  dim-witted,  having  lost  its  intellectual  capacities;  and 
losing  the  animating  vigor  of  that  conscious  spirit,  the  source  of its 
strength  and  vitality  while  alive,  would  severely  enfeeble  it.  Being 
intellectually  incapacitated,  it  might  imagine  that  it  had  fallen  into 
some  murky  netherworld  far  beneath  the  world  of the  living,  when  in 
fact  it had  actually  descended  into  the  murky  recesses  in  the  deepest 
levels  of the  unconscious.  Submerging  deeper  and  deeper  into  the foul 
dregs  of that  unconscious  wasteland  might  seem  like  sinking  into  the 
miry waters  of the  great deep  itself.  

The idea of the land of the dead being an "underworld" is probably the 
most widespread  traditional  concept  of the  afterlife,  found  in  cultures 
all around the globe  (Van Baaren,  1987).  Civilizations  from the  ancient 
East to the  Maori of New Zealand,  from the  tribes of the Algonquin  and 
the Ojibwa in North America  to those  of the Zulu, Ashanti,  and Dogon in 
Africa arrived at the same conclusion:  that the souls of the dead descend 
to some  dark netherworld  located  far below  the land of the  living (Long, 
1987).  The  Vedic  legends  of  early  India,  for  example,  described  the 
souls  of the  dead  entering  a  dark  and  silent  bottomless  pit  populated 
by  pale,  starving,  emaciated  specters  (Van  Nooten  and  Hilland,  1994).  
Mesopotamian  souls  also  descended  to  a  dreary  netherworld  of  total 
darkness,  silence,  immobility,  and  hunger  (Davies,  1987),  as  were  the 
ancient  Greek  dead,  who were  believed  to be  condemned  to  a wretched 
subterranean  existence  eternally  shrouded  in  mist  and shadow.  Greek 
texts described  the  souls of the  dead as weak, cold,  joyless, unconscious, 
and incommunicative  (Brandon,  1967).  Similarly,  the ancient  Egyptian 
underworld  was  a  boundless  watery  black  abyss  whose  inhabitants 
were  naked,  starving,  deaf,  and  blind  (Zandee,  1977).  In  China,  the 
dead  were  said  to  spend  eternity  in  a  murky  subterranean  land  in  a 
semiconscious  state  (Seidel,  1987).  

Ancient  concepts  of  the  netherworld  are  in  close  accord  with  the 
scenario  predicted  by  the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine.  More  importantly, 
this  classic  vision  is  not  only  ancient  history;  the  same  sort  of 
vision  is  reported  today.  Within  a  span  of  two  days,  according  to 
P.  M.  H.  Atwater,  the  same  hellish  NDE  vision  was  independently 
witnessed  by  four strangers:  "A landscape  of barren,  rolling  hills  filled 
to  overflowing  with  nude,  zombie-like  people  standing  elbow-to-elbow 
doing  nothing  but  staring  straight  at  [the  NDErs]"  (Atwater,  1994, 
pp.  36-37).  
Today, 

the  most  common 
thousands  of  years  ago, 
characteristics  of  the  hellish  vision  seem  to  be  lifeless  but  anxious 
wraiths  in suffocating,  dark,  barren  expanses.  The  majority  of NDErs

just  as 

178

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

still describe  the hell  they visit as cold,  hard, and empty,  with  dulled  or 
dimmed  light,  just as  were  reported thousands  of years  ago  (Atwater, 
1994).  Such  descriptions  are  what  would  be  predicted  by  the  Binary 
Soul  Doctrine:  the  souls  of the dead  would  descend  to  a  lower  level,  but 
lower  in terms  of consciousness  rather than geology.  

Surprisingly,  the  hypothesis  that  the  conscious  and  unconscious 
separate  after death does  not lead  to  an alien  or unfamiliar description 
of the afterlife,  but instead describes  a familiar picture of the primordial 
and  seemingly  universal  image  of  the netherworld.  This  suggests  that 
these  descriptions  of the  netherworld  are not  a  true or  literal  picture 
of the afterlife,  but a metaphor.  The Binary Soul  Doctrine  suggests  that 
the  ancient  traditions of  various  underworld  realms  are  genuine  and 
valid,  but as  metaphorical  rather than literal  reports,  as  descriptions 
of  an  experience  of  the  unconscious  that  may  otherwise  be  entirely 
untranslatable  and  incomprehensible  to  the  conscious  mind:  "... all 
along  my  near-death  subjects  have  insisted  that the  words  they  use 
to  describe  their experiences  are  only  analogies  or  metaphors  used  to 
indicate  experiences  that ultimately  lie  beyond  all  human  language" 
(Moody,  1977,  p.  38).  

Reincarnation 

The  division  of  conscious  from  unconscious  seems  to  have  much  in 
common  with  one  of the  oldest  conceptions  of the  afterlife,  the doctrine 
of  rebirth.  Although  the  conscious  would  lose  its  entire  memory  if 
separated  from  the  unconscious,  it  would  nonetheless  still  maintain 
full  control  over  its  own  independent  volition,  remaining  free  to  make 
new  choices  and able  to  move  on  to  fresh  new  cycles  of experience,  the 
recipe  for reincarnation.  

Such  a  division  would  also  explain  certain  strange  phenomena  that 
past-life  regression  subjects  have  often  reported during the  time  spent 
between  lives.  Individuals  who  have  undergone  past-life  regression, 
being hypnotically  regressed  to a point in time between  lives,  have  often 
reported spending  time in an emotionless  black  void similar to the dark 
void of the first stage of NDEs.  Regression  researchers such as Raymond 
Moody  (Moody  and  Perry,  1991),  Brad  Steiger  (1996),  Joel  Whitton 
and  Joe  Fisher  (1986),  and  many  others  have  all  reported regression 
subjects  floating  aimlessly  between  lives,  peacefully,  totally  alone  in  a 
calm  empty  void.  Like  those  who  experience  the  dark void  in  the  first 
stage  of  NDEs,  these  subjects  also  often  report a  complete  absence  of 
feeling  and  emotion  while  in this void  (Steiger,  1996).  They  seem  to  be

PETER NOVAK

179

emotionally  vacant,  feeling  nothing,  very  calm  and  unperturbed, not 
feeling  connected  to,  interested in,  or desirous  of anything.  

The  Void Between  Lives 

Memory  loss  often  seems  to  be  a part of  this  experience;  many  sub
jects  do  not  remember  their own  names  or  anything  else  about  their 
previous  life  while  they  are floating  in this  void.  All  they  can remember 
is floating  calmly  alone  in an  empty void.  Some  regression  researchers 
have  reported  subjects  who  seemed  to  remain  in  such  a  emotionless, 
memory-less  state  for  years  or  decades  between  lives,  never  entering 
into  any  realm  that even  remotely  resembles  an  NDE-like  heaven  or 
hell  (Steiger,  1996).  After  this  NDE-like  void,  the  next  thing  many 
regressed  subjects  recall  is  reincarnating  into  a  new  body,  without 
experiencing  anything  like  the  classic  "realm of  light"  of  the  second 
stage  of NDEs  (Steiger,  1996).  

Whitton  and  Fisher  (1986)  reported  that regression  subjects  often 
forget  who  they  are  between 
losing  all  sense  of  personal 
lives, 
identity to become  dispassionate  observers  floating  in  a  limbo  without 
any  subjective  sense  of  self.  They  also  reported  that  many  subjects 
experience  a  dissociative  consciousness  after  death,  in  which  their 
minds  literally  separate  into  two  distinct  streams  of  awareness.  The 
individual,  however, 
is  usually  only  aware  of  only  one  stream  at 
any  given  time  (Whitton  and  Fisher,  1986).  Michael  Newton  (1994) 
also  maintained,  based  on  his  study  of  past-life  regressions,  that 
people's  souls  split  into  two  parts  between  one  life  and  the  next.  His 
subjects  reported that half a  person's soul  often  remains behind  in the 
netherworld,  in a  sort  of dormancy  or  dreaming  sleep,  while  the  other 
half travels  back  to  earth  to  be  reincarnated into  another  body.  One 
can find  this  soul-division  theme  repeated in NDEs  as  well.  Two  near
death experiencers  reported by  Barbara Rommer  (2000),  Sadhana  and 
Eve,  both seemed  to  have  experienced  soul  division  during their NDEs, 
and Olaf Sunden  also  reported his  own  mind  "splitting into  two  parts" 
during his  NDE  (Morse  and Perry,  1992,  p.  12).  

Haunting Ghosts 

If the  unconscious  was  cut off  from  the  conscious  mind  after  death, 

it  would  review  and  re-experience  its  memories,  feelings,  and  self
judgments  over  and  over,  which  explain  the  automatic  sleepwalking

180

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

behavior  of  haunting  ghosts.  The  unconscious  would  just  keep  re
experiencing  the same  traumas from its past in an endless  nightmare of 
emotions  and memories.  Haunting ghosts,  the most commonly  reported 
type  of  ghost,  display  this  very  behavior,  repeatedly  reliving  their 
memories,  often  of  some  emotionally  traumatic  event.  They  seem  to 
possess  no  objective  awareness  or  rational  intellect,  almost  never 
noticing  the  presence  of  others  or  of  new  walls  and  floor-plans  that 
have  been erected in the building since  they  died (Guiley,  1992).  In both 
ancient  and modern  reports,  the  ghosts  of  the  dead  are  seen  wearing 
the  same  clothing  and  hairstyles  they  wore  while  alive.  Seeming  to 
have  lost  all  verbal  communication  ability,  these  sleepwalking  ghosts 
usually  cannot  be  communicated  with  at all,  and in the  rare instances 
when  they  do communicate,  it almost always  takes the form of  pictures, 
images,  and  symbolism,  a  "right brain" kind  of  communication,  and 
almost never uses spoken words  or written language (Guiley,  1992).  The 
long  history  of the  nonverbal  nature of these  entities  dates back  to the 
souls  of the dead  in Homer's Iliad,  who  were  portrayed as  being unable 
to speak properly (Bremmer,  1987).  These  characteristics are consistent 
with  an unconscious  mind no  longer  in contact  with  its  conscious  half.  

Apparitions of the Dead 

Another  type  of  ghost,  often  called  "apparitions of  the  dead,"  are 
seen  usually  only  by  their friends  and  loved  ones.  The  vast  majority 
of  these  visits  occur  in  the first year  or  two  after the  person  has  died.  
These  apparitions  are  very  unlike  the  other  types  of  ghosts  in  that 
they  usually  show  no  signs  of having  suffered  any  mental  impairment 
at  all.  They  seem  still  to  have  full  use  of  all  their  mental  faculties: 
they  still  possess  their  memories  and  sense  of  self-identity,  and  they 
can  still  think rationally  and  communicate  efficiently  and  effectively.  
But  one  curious  element  of  these  apparitions may  hold  a clue  to  their 
nature: the  vast  majority  of  these  appearances  occur  very  soon  after 
the  person's  death.  Very  few  occur  more  than  a  few  years  after  the 
death,  and  practically  none  occur  after  15  or  20  years  (Guggenheim 
and  Guggenheim,  1996).  There  are,  of  course,  notable  exceptions  to 
this;  apparitions of  some  religious  holy  figures  have  been  reported  to 
have  been  seen  century  after  century.  And  of  all  the  different  types 
of  afterlife  phenomena,  these  religious  apparitions  are  the  only  ones 
that seem  to  hold  any  promise  of true "eternal life,"  in which  a person 
survives  death without suffering  any deterioration of his  or her mental 
faculties.

PETER NOVAK

181

Reports  of Psychics and Mediums 

Modern  mediums  claim  to perceive  and sometimes  interact with  the 
souls  of  the  dead,  and much  of  what they  say  about  these  experiences 
is  consistent  with  the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine.  Psychic  Sylvia  Brown 
(1999),  medium James Van  Praagh (1999),  and out-of-body-experience 
pioneer  Robert  Monroe  (1994)  all  described  souls  of  the  dead  who 
seemed  to be  suffering from extreme  confusion,  often unable  to perform 
the  elementary  deductive  logic  necessary  to  figure  out  that they  have 
passed  on.  Van  Praagh (1999)  and  Brown  (1999)  also  both  maintain 
that entities  in the  other world  tend to be  nonverbal;  instead  of verbal 
communication,  Brown  wrote,  spirits and ghosts  often communicate  by 
pantomime.  This  would  be  consistent  with  the  Binary  Soul  Doctrine; 
without the conscious  mind,  the unconscious  would  lack linear thought 
processes,  rendering  it  incapable  of  both  logical  reason  and  verbal 
communication.  Going one  step further, Brown (1999),  like Edgar Cayce 
(Bro,  1988)  and  Steiner  (1984)  before  her,  specifically  identified  the 
unconscious  as  the  "spirit mind,"  the  mind  used  in  the  realm  of  the 
dead.  

In  many  respects,  Van  Praagh's  (1999)  descriptions  of  the  afterlife 
are a textbook  example  of the Binary Soul  Doctrine.  He  wrote  that two 
personal  elements  survive  physical  death:  an  "emotional  body"  that 
contains  all  one's  thoughts,  emotions,  feelings,  yearnings,  and desires, 
like  the  unconscious  mind;  and  a mental  body  that he  associates  with 
a  person's  data,  logic,  intelligence,  and  reasoning  abilities,  like  the 
conscious  mind.  But  after  writing that "these bodies  intermingle  and 
are dependent on one  another, and make us whole  beings" (Van  Praagh, 
1999,  p.  33),  he  then  described  that  wholeness  being  irreversibly 
shattered  after  death,  the  two  elements  permanently  separated,  an 
event  he  identified  as  the  "second  death."  The  mental  body  continues 
on alone  after this division,  he wrote, leaving  behind the  emotional  body 
that then  begins  to  deteriorate (Van  Praagh,  1999).  Similarly,  Monroe 
(1994)  also  taught  that one  part of  a  person  would  be  left  behind  in 
the  realm  of the  dead  while  another  part went  on  to  reincarnate,  and 
placed  tremendous emphasis  on  the importance  of  collecting  these  lost 
parts of the self  and reintegrating them back into  one's  present psyche.  
According  to  Brown  (1999),  then,  the souls  of the  dead  are dim-witted, 
nonverbal,  and unconscious-dominant;  while  Van Praagh (1999)  agreed 
that the souls  of the dead are  dim-witted and nonverbal,  but added that 
during life,  people  are composed  of a rational and an emotional  element, 
which  split  apart at  death.  And  Monroe  (1994)  agreed  that the  souls

182

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

of the  dead  are  dim-witted  and  divide  at  death,  but  added  that  these 
divided parts could be reunited and reintegrated  at a later point in time.  
All  these  descriptions  are consistent  with  the Binary  Soul  Doctrine.  

This Answer  From the Ancient  World  Really  Works 

The  connections  between  humanity's  afterlife  reports  and  the 
Binary  Soul  Doctrine  imply  that  these  afterlife  phenomena  that 
have  been  reported  down  through  the  ages  were  predictable  through 
basic  psychological  dynamics.  An  afterdeath  division  of  the  conscious 
and  unconscious  provides  a  scientific  explanation  for  the  commonly 
reported  afterlife  phenomena,  experiences  that seem  to be  hard-wired 
into  the  human  psyche.  The  Binary  Soul  Doctrine  may  also  solve  the 
riddle  of humanity's  two  conflicting  afterlife  scenarios:  reincarnation 
vs.  heaven  or  hell.  The  world  has  held  onto  these  two  seemingly 
incompatible  doctrines  because  two  very  fundamentally  different 
afterlife  experiences  really  were  being  experienced.  The  soul,  or  the 
unconscious,  was  having  one  type  of  experience,  and  the  spirit,  or 
conscious,  was having a radically  different  one.  The scientific  discovery 
of  the  conscious  and  unconscious  and  the  once-widespread  Binary 
Soul  Doctrine  which  it  echoes  suggest  that  human  religion  began  as 
a science,  a discipline  that  explored  the  psychological  mechanics  of an 
eternal mind that, while  it could not truly die, could nonetheless  become 
profoundly  fractured.  

More  Questions 

The  Binary  Soul  Doctrine  raises  further  questions.  For  instance,  if 
our psyches  do divide at death,  if the very lens of our perception splits  in 
two,  is  our  entire  perception  of reality  therefore  fractured  and  invalid 
from  that  point  on?  If NDErs  are  in  profoundly  dissociated  states  of 
consciousness  during  their  experiences,  can  their  reports  be  trusted? 
Can  either half of the  psyche  be  trusted  to  provide  a  valid  picture  of 
reality  when  they are  divorced  from  one  another? 

One good reason to consider trusting their input might be  the obvious 
parallel  between  the  two  halves  of the  psyche  and  the  two  eyes  of the 
face:  one  integrates  the input  from  both sides of the psyche  in  much the 
same way that one  integrates  the  input from  both  eyes.  When  a person 
closes  one  eye  and  peers  through  the  other,  is  that  single  eye's  vision 
wrong or invalid?  Of course  not;  each eye,  on its own,  provides  valuable

PETER NOVAK

183

and  accurate  data.  Yet  each  eye  alone  cannot  provide  as  full  a  picture 
of reality  as  the  two  eyes  can  together.  Each  eye  alone  can  only  offer 
a  two-dimensional  image;  only  together  can  the  flat  two-dimensional 
inputs of each eye  be combined  to produce true three-dimensional  depth 
perception.  In  the  same  way,  I  suspect,  the  experience  of each  side  of 
the  psyche  on  its  own  provides  us with  accurate  data;  each  on its  own 
has  an  equally  valid  perception  of reality.  But  just  like  eyes,  which 
dimension(s)  one  perceives  and  experiences  depends  on  whether  one  is 
looking only  out  of one  side,  only  out  of the  other,  or  out  of both  at the 
same  time.  

Is the  division permanent?  That  is,  when the  conscious  mind  goes on 
to  reincarnate,  does  the  unconscious  stay  behind  in  its heaven  or  hell? 
If so,  then  where  does  the  new  unconscious  for the  next  lifetime  come 
from? And  does  the  apparent  fact  that the  discarded  unconscious  from 
one's  previous  life  seems  still  to  be  functioning,  actively  registering 
and  processing  experience,  have  anything  to  do  with  the  already
psychoactive  unconscious  of  infants?  Do  people  have  untold  numbers 
of long-forgotten  past-life  unconscious  souls  still  actively  involved  in 
their  own  heavenly  or  hellish  experiences  deep  within  their  psyches? 
The  early  Christian  Gnostics  seem  to  have  thought  so,  and  made  it  a 
prerequisite  for salvation  to  reawaken  these  past-life  selves  from their 
slumbers  (Novak,  1997).  

What  does  this  division  do  to  the  self?  During  life,  human  beings 
are  not simple,  but complex  creatures,  formed  equally out  of two parts.  
A  person  is  not  quite  a  soul  that  possesses  a  spirit,  nor  a  conscious 
that happens  to  have  an unconscious;  instead,  a person  is  a composite 
creature  formed  out  of the  pair.  Or  is  it more  correct  to  say  that one's 
self is  not the  marriage  of these  two  parts,  but rather  the  fruit  of that 
marriage?  A  person  cannot  honestly  identify  with  just  one  of  these 
parts  and  deny  the  other;  for just as  the  two  hemispheres  of the  brain 
are  equal  in  size,  so  too  the  sense  and  experience  of  self  is  equally 
dependent  on  both  halves  of the  psyche.  The  experience  of  self,  one's 
sense  of identity,  is  born  out  of the  deeply  integrated  marriage  of the 
two  halves  of the  psyche.  Does  the  disintegration  of that  integration 
destroy  the  self that  one  experiences  oneself  to  be?  Some  quotes  from 
NDErs  suggest  the  destruction  of the  self: 

Identity ceases.  The "you" that you  once were  becomes  only a  memory.  
(Atwater,  1994,  p.  182) 

No  words  were  spoken  but  my  predicament  was  completely 
understood.  I loved  my  wife more  dearly  than life itself and  I could  not

184

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

leave  here  like  this.  I  knew  that we  would  never  meet  again  because 
as individuals  we  would  cease  to  exist.  The  concept  is  so  very  sad and 
it  is  utterly  inadequate  to  say  that it does  not  matter.  (Fenwick  and 
Fenwick,  1997,  p.  108) 

Does  the division  get  worse  over time?  Does  the partial deterioration 
of  personal  boundaries  experienced  during  NDEs  increase  to  a  fuller 
dissolution  of those  boundaries once  death is complete  and irreversible? 
Both  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Hebrews  seem  to have  thought  so.  Do  the 
souls  of  the  dead  deteriorate  over  time,  as  so  many  ancient  cultures 
believed?  The  fact  that  the  vast  majority  of undivided-psyche  appari
tions of the dead  occur within  the first year or two after the individual's 
death suggest  that they  do  (Guggenheim  and  Guggenheim,  1996).  

Although  both  groups  show  some  signs  of  psychological  disinte
gration,  the  souls  in  the  Realm  of  Bewildered  Spirits  seem  to  be  far 
less  psychologically  functional,  integrated,  and whole  than those  in the 
Realm  of Light.  Are  there  then  varying  degrees  of  division?  If so,  do 
some  people  die  without  dividing  at all?  Certain  reports  of NDEs,  past
life  regressions,  after-death  communications,  and  apparitions  of  the 
dead  do seem  to  suggest  that some  individuals  successfully  survive  the 
separation from the body  without any  loss  of psychological  integration.  
If it is possible to die without dividing, how might  this be accomplished? 
Is  some  sort  of  integration  of  the  conscious  and  unconscious  prior to 
death  the  key to  preventing  this  division?  Many  ancient  traditions  do 
suggest  this,  such  as the  ancient  Egyptian funerary rituals uniting the 
ba and ka,  the Taoist  emphasis  on  balancing the  yin and yang,  and the 
traditions of Jesus having "made the two one" in various early  Christian 
works.  Such  integral  approaches  are growing  more  common  in  today's 
culture,  illustrated  by  recent books  such  as  The Marriage of Sense and 
Soul (Wilber,  1999),  Men Are From Mars,  Women Are From Venus (Gray, 
1992),  and Emotional Intelligence: Why  It Is More Important Than IQ 
(Goleman,  1997).  

NDEs,  it seems,  may also  help  achieve  this integration; experiencers 
often  return  with  more  balanced,  healthy,  and  creative  outlooks  on 
life,  and sometimes  with  new  psychic  abilities (Morse  and  Perry,  1992).  
Men  end  up more  in touch  with their feminine  sides,  women  with their 
masculine  sides.  After  their  NDEs,  many  who  had  previously  been 
more right-brained, intuitive,  and unconscious-oriented  reportedly find 
themselves  becoming  more  left-brained,  analytical,  and  conscious
oriented;  and  vice-versa:  "The  near-death  phenomenon  seems 
to 
stimulate  the  brain hemisphere  that  was  not  previously  dominant" 
(Atwater,  1994,  p.  163).

PETER NOVAK

185

Both  ancient  tradition  and  modern  phenomena  seem  to  reflect  the 
same  after-death  division.  Is it coincidence,  then,  that so  many  NDErs 
seem  to  enjoy  a  stronger,  closer,  healthier,  more  balanced  and  fruitful 
relationship  between the  two  sides of their psyches  than they  had prior 
to their experiences?  This  suggests a "rubber band" hypothesis:  if NDEs 
stretch  apart  the  conscious  and  unconscious,  might  those  two  halves 
then  snap  back  together  into  a  closer,  more  integrated  relationship 
afterwards?  John  11:14-16  seems  to  suggest  such  a  metaphysical  law: 

Then  Jesus  told  them  plainly,  "Lazarus  is  dead;  and  for  your  sake  I 
am glad that I  was  not there,  so  that you  may  believe.  But let  us  go  to 
him." Thomas, called  the  twin,  said to his  fellow  disciples,  "Let us also 
go,  that we  may  die  with  him." 

as  does  Tao  Te  Ching: 

What is to  be  shrunken  is  first  stretched  out; 
What is to  be  weakened  is first  made  strong; 
What  will  be  thrown  over  is first  raised  up; 
What will  be  withdrawn  is first  bestowed.  (Blakney,  1983,  p.  36) 

The  vast majority  of humanity's  ancient  descriptions  of the  realm  of 
the dead  seem to refer to the hellish  Realm of Bewildered Souls; yet the 
vast majority of contemporary  NDE  reports  describe  a heavenly  realm, 
with  only  relatively  few  describing  the  hellish  scenario.  Why  is  there 
this discrepancy? Are fewer hellish NDEs being  experienced  today than 
in humanity's  past,  or  are  fewer being  reported  than  are  experienced? 
If fewer are being  experienced  than  earlier  in humanity's  history,  what 
caused  the  change? 

Objectivity  Versus  Subjectivity 

The  Buddhist  view  dismisses  the  second-stage  Realm  of  Light  as 
illusory,  believing  instead  that  the  dark  void  encountered  during  the 
first stage of the  NDE  is the  true  face  of ultimate  reality  and  therefore 
the  most  valuable  part  of  the  experience.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
consensus  among  contemporary  NDErs tends  to discount the  dark void 
as  a  mere  passageway,  seeing  instead  the  glorious  Realm  of Light  as 
the  ultimate  reality  and  therefore  the  most  meaningful  part  of  the 
NDE.  Finally,  the  ancient  Christian  Gnostics  insisted  that  genuine 
truth  cannot  be  discovered  by  valuing  one  polarity  above  the  other, 
but instead  by  "making  the  two one,"  integrating the  two  perspectives 
together.  Which  of these  three  perspectives  is correct?

186

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

The  characteristics  of  the  second  phase  of  the  NDE  seem  to  have 
much in common with the  unconscious  mind.  Should one  then conclude 
that  the  unconscious  mind  is  the  only  part  of  the  self that  visits  and 
experiences  the  classic  heavenly  and  hellish  realms?  Cayce  thought  so 
(Bro,  1988);  so,  it  seems,  did  Rudolf  Steiner  (1984)  and  perhaps  even 
Swedenborg  (1979/1758).  

If  so,  then  this  second  phase  of  the  NDE  is  an  entirely subjective 
experience, for the unconscious  is entirely  subjective.  The significance  of 
this conclusion  cannot be overstated.  In  a totally  subjective  experience, 
the  entire  way  the  rest  of  the  world  looks,  feels,  and  is  experienced 
would  be  completely  and  utterly  dependent  on  how  one  feels  inside 
oneself,  on  how  one  sees  oneself.  In  the  world  of the  purely  subjective, 
the  whole  universe  is but  a mirror  reflecting  one's  own thoughts  about 
oneself.  In  a  world  of  pure  subjectivity,  there  would  be  only  subject, 
only  self.  There  would  be  no  object,  no  "other,"  no  "thing  in  itself,"  no 
independently-existing  anything that was truly  apart and separate  and 
distinct from  the  observer.  

When  one  is  in the  dark void  of the  first  stage  of NDEs,  on  the  other 
hand,  one  seems  to  be  operating  in  a  purely  objective  mode.  It  would 
only  be  then,  while  in that  objective  mode,  that one  would  actually  be 
capable  of recognizing  and  discerning  the  existence  of any other thing, 
if in fact  any  other  object  besides  oneself really  existed  and  was  there 
to  see.  But instead  one  sees  only  nothingness  at  this  unique  moment 
when  one  is,  for  the  first  time  in  one's  entire  life's  experience,  peering 
out onto the universe  exclusively  through this objective eye.  It is only in 
the  second phase of NDEs,  while one is in  the subjective  mode,  and thus 
really  only  looking  back  at  oneself the  whole  time,  that  anything  else 
seems to  exist.  This realization  compels  one  to wonder  if there  really  is 
any  other  "thing in  itself"  apart  from  the  observer,  or  if,  as  Hinduism 
and Buddhism  have  declared  all  along,  one's  own  consciousness  is  the 
only  thing  that  objectively  exists  in  all  of reality.  Are  the  two  phases 
of the  NDE  really just two  different  ways  of looking  at the  exact  same 
reality?  Do  the  darkness  and  the  light  show  us two  different  realities, 
two  distinct  realms,  or  do  they  both  show  us  the  very  same "thing  in 
itself,"  which just happens  to  seem  different  because  it is  being viewed 
through  two  very  different  kinds  of observing  eyes:  the  conscious  and 
the unconscious? 

What  is  within  us  is  also  without.  What  is  without  is  also  within.  
He  who  sees  difference  between  what  is  within  and  what  is  without 
goes evermore  from  death to  death.  (Prabhavananda  and Manchester, 
1948,  "Katha  Upanishad")

PETER NOVAK

187

When  you  make  the  two  one,  and  when  you  make  the  inside  like 
the  outside,  and  the  outside  like  the  inside,  and  the  above  like  the 
below...then  you  will  enter  the  Kingdom.  (Robinson,  1977,  "The 
Gospel  of Thomas,"  p.  121) 

References 

Atwater,  P.  M.  H.  (1994).  Beyond  the light. New  York,  NY:  Birch Lane  Press.  
Bhattacharyya,  S.  (1987).  Indian  philosophies.  In  Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia  of 

religion (Vol.  7,  pp.  163-168).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Blakney,  R.  B.  (Trans.).  (1983).  Tao te  ching. New York,  NY:  New  American  Library.  
Boldman,  R.  (1999).  Sacred life,  holy death: Seven stages of crossing the divide. Sante Fe, 

NM:  Heartsfire  Books.  

Brandon,  S.  G.  F.  (1967).  The judgment of the dead. New York,  NY:  Scribner's.  
Bremmer,  J.  (1987).  Soul:  Greek  and  Hellenistic  concepts.  In  Eliade,  M. 

(Ed.), 

Encyclopedia of religion (Vol.  13,  pp.  434-438).  New  York,  NY:  MacMillan.  

Bro, H.  H. (1988).  Edgar Cayce on religion and psychic experience. New York,  NY: Warner.  
Brown,  S.  (1999).  The  other side  and back: A  psychic's guide to  our  world and  beyond.  

New York,  NY:  Dutton.  

Buckley,  J.  J.  (1987).  Mandaean  religion.  In  Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia of religion 

(Vol.  9,  pp.  150-153).  New  York,  NY:  MacMillan.  

Budge,  E.  W.  (1967).  The  Egyptian book  of the  dead: The papyrus of Ani.  New  York,  NY: 

Dover.  

Buscaglia,  L.  (1986).  Personhood: The  art of being fully  human. New  York,  NY:  Fawcett.  
Campbell,  J.  (1949).  The  hero with a thousand faces. Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton  University 

Press.  

Crehan,  J.  (1976).  Near  Eastern  societies.  In  Toynbee,  A.,  and  Koestler,  A.  (Eds.),  Life 

after death (pp.  97-122).  New York,  NY:  McGraw-Hill.  

Davies,  S.  (1987).  Soul:  Ancient  Near Eastern concepts.  In Eliade,  M.  (Ed.), Encyclopedia 

of religion (Vol.  13,  pp.  431-434).  New York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Eadie,  B.  J.,  and  Taylor,  C.  (1992).  Embraced by  the light. Placerville,  CA:  Gold  Leaf.  
Effland,  R.  (1999).  Death:  what  was  it?  Mesa,  NM:  Department  of  Anthropology, 
Mesa  Community  College.  Retrieved  December  31,  1999  from  the  World  Wide  Web: 
http://www.mc.maricopa.edu/anthro/egypt/cultdeath.html 

El  Mahdy,  C.  (1989).  Mummies,  myth,  and magic. New York,  NY:  Thames  and  Hudson.  
Fenwick,  P.,  and  Fenwick,  E.  (1997).  The  truth in  the  light: An  investigation of over 300 

near-death experiences.  New York,  NY :  Berkley  Books.  

Freud,  S.  (1965).  New  introductory lectures in  psychoanalysis. New  York,  NY:  Norton.  

(Original  work  published  1932) 

Gallup,  G.,  and  Proctor, W.  (1982).  Adventures in immortality: A  look beyond the threshold 

of death. New  York,  NY:  McGraw-Hill.  

Gnoli, G.  (1987).  Iranian religions.  In  Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia of religion (Vol.  7, 

pp.  277-280).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Goleman,  D.  (1997). Emotional intelligence:  Why it is more important than IQ. New York, 

NY:  Bantam.  

Gray,  J.  (1992).  Men  are from  Mars,  women  are  from  Venus:  A  practical guide  for 
improving communication and getting what you want in your relationships. New York, 
NY:  HarperCollins.  

Grey,  M.  (1985). Return from death: An exploration of the  near-death experience.  London, 

England:  Arkana.  

Guggenheim,  B.,  and Guggenheim,  J.  (1996).  Hello from heaven. New York,  NY:  Bantam.

188

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

Guiley,  R.  E.  (1992).  The  encyclopedia  of ghosts  and  spirits.  New  York,  NY:  Facts  on 

File.  

Jung,  C.  G.  (1953).  The collected  works  of C.  G.  Jung. Volume  7: Two  essays  on  analytical 

psychology.  Princeton,  NJ: Princeton  University  Press.  

Jung,  C.  G.  (1960).  The  collected  works  of  C.  G.  Jung.  Volume  8:  The  structure  and 

dynamics  of the psyche.  Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton  University  Press.  

Long,  J.  B.  (1987).  Underworld.  In  Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia  of  religion  (Vol.  15, 

pp.  126-134).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Long,  M.  F.  (1965).  The  huna code  in  religions.  Marina del  Rey,  CA:  DeVorss.  
Lundahl,  C.  R.,  and  Widdison,  H.  A.  (1997).  The  eternal  journey:  How  near-death 

experiences  illuminate our earthly  lives.  New  York,  NY:  Warner Books.  

Mahony,  W.  K.  (1987).  Soul:  Indian concepts.  In Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia  of religion 

(Vol.  13,  pp.  438-443).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Monroe,  R.  A.  (1994).  Ultimate journey.  New  York,  NY:  Doubleday.  
Moody,  R.  A.  (1977).  Reflections  on  life  after  life.  St.  Simon's  Island,  GA:  Mockingbird 

Books.  

Moody,  R.  A.,  and Perry, P.  (1991).  Coming back: A psychiatrist explores  past-life  journeys.  

New  York,  NY:  Bantam.  

Morse,  M.,  and Perry,  P.  (1992).-Transformed  by  the light: The powerful  effect  of near-death 

experiences  on people's  lives.  New  York,  NY:  Villard.  

Newton,  M.  (1994).  Journey of souls:  Case  studies  of life  between  lives.  St.  Paul,  MN: 

Llewellyn.  

Novak,  P.  (1997).  The  division  of consciousness:  The  secret  afterlife  of the  human psyche.  

Charlottesville,  VA  :  Hampton  Roads.  

Ornstein,  R.  (1997).  The  right brain.  New  York,  NY:  Harcourt Brace.  
Prabhavananda,  S.,  and  Manchester,  F.  (Eds).  (1948).  The  Upanishads:  Breath  of  the 

eternal.  Hollywood,  CA:  Vedanta  Society  of  Southern California.  

Ries,  J.  (1987).  Immortality.  In Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia  of religion  (Vol.  7,  pp.  123

145).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Ring,  K.  (1980).  Life  at death: A  scientific  exploration  of the  near-death  experience.  New 

York,  NY :  Coward,  McCann,  and Geoghegan.  

Riviere,  C.  (1987).  Soul:  Concepts  in primitive religions.  In Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia 

of religion  (Vol.  13,  pp.  426-431).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Robinson,  J.  M.  (Trans.).  (1977).  The  Nag  Hammadi  library  in  English.  San  Francisco, 

CA:  Harper and Row.  

Rommer,  B.  R.  (2000).  Blessings  in  disguise:  Another  side  of  the  near-death  experience.  

St.  Paul,  MN:  Llewellyn.  

Sagan,  C.  (1977).  The  dragons  of  Eden:  Speculations  on  the  evolution  of  human 

intelligence.  New  York,  NY :  Random  House.  

Schiffer,  F.  (1998).  Of two  minds: The  revolutionary  science  of dual-brain psychology.  New 

York,  NY:  Free  Press.  

Seidel,  A.  (1987).  Afterlife:  Chinese  concepts.  In Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia  of religion 

(Vol.  1,  pp.  124-127).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Springer,  S.  P.,  and  Deutsch,  G.  (1985).  Left  brain,  right  brain.  New  York,  NY:  W.  H.  

Freeman.  

Steiger,  B.  (1996).  Returning from  the light.  New  York,  NY:  Penguin.  
Steiner,  R.  (1984).  The  essential  Steiner.  (McDermott,  R.A.,  Ed.).  San  Francisco,  CA: 

HarperSanFrancisco.  

Strong,  J.  (1984).  Dictionary  of  the  Hebrew  Bible.  In  The  new  Strong's  exhaustive 

concordance  of the Bible.  New  York,  NY:  Nelson  Publishers.  

Swedenborg,  E.  (1979).  Heaven  and  hell.  New  York,  NY:  Swedenborg  Foundation.  

(Original work  published  1758).  

Tober, L.  M.,  and Lusby,  F.  S.  (1987).  Heaven  and hell.  In  Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia 

of religion (Vol.  6,  pp.  237-243).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.

PETER  NOVAK 

189 

Van  Baaren,  T.  P.  (1987).  Afterlife:  Geography  of death.  In  Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia 

of religion (Vol.  1,  pp.  116-120).  New York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Van  Nooten,  B.  A.,  and  Hilland,  G.  B.  (Eds.).  (1994).  Rig veda. Cambridge,  MA:  Harvard 

University  Press.  

Van  Praagh,  J.  (1999).  Reaching to  heaven: A  spiritual journey  through life  and death.  

New  York,  NY:  Dutton.  

Watterson,  B.  (1984).  The gods of ancient Egypt. New York,  NY:  Facts  on File Publications.  
Wei-Ming,  T.  (1987).  Soul:  Chinese concepts.  In Eliade,  M.  (Ed.),  Encyclopedia of religion 

(Vol.  13,  pp.  447-450).  New  York,  NY:  Macmillan.  

Wheeler,  R.  L.  (1999).  Walk  like an Egyptian. New  York,  NY:  Allisone  Press.  
Whitton,  J.  L.,  and  Fisher,  J. (1986).  Life  between life.  New  York,  NY:  Warner  Books.  
Wilber,  K.  (1999).  The marriage of sense and soul:Integrating science and religion. Boston, 

MA:  Shambhala.  

Williams,  K.  (1999).  Near-death experiences and the  afterlife.  Retrieved  December  31, 

1999  from  the World  Wide  Web:  http:/www.near-death.com 

Zandee,  J.  (1977).  Death as  an enemy  according to  ancient Egyptian conceptions.  New 

York,  NY:  Arno  Press.

