The  Structure and Function of 
Near-Death  Experiences:  An 
Algorithmic  Reincarnation Hypothesis 

Todd  Murphy 

San Francisco, CA 

is 

(NDE) 

that  a  near-death  experience 

ABSTRACT:  Hypothesizes 
the 
subjective  experience  of  having  the  state  of  consciousness  in  which  a  person 
experiences  the  last  moment  of his  or  her  life  being turned,  in  stages,  into  the 
state  of consciousness  experienced  as  the  "point  of  no  return."  The  life  review 
this,  as  is  interpreted  as  a  review  of  the  states  of  consciousness  experienced 
during  our  lives.  Our  responses  to  reviewing  our  own  behaviors  while  in 
specific  states  reinforces  and  classifies  them  into  those  to  repeat  in  future 
lives and  those  to  avoid.  We  examine  a modification  of the traditional  doctrine 
of reincarnation  that  takes  into  account  biological  and  cultural  evolution.  This 
allows  an  understanding  of how  the  attributes  of NDEs could  have  undergone 
selection  even  though all  opportunities  for  mating  have  already  passed  at the 
time  of death.  

KEY  WORDS:  near-death  experience;  reincarnation;  Buddhism;  rebirth.  

Seventy  percent  of  near-death  experiencers  (NDErs)  return  from 
their  experiences  believing  in  reincarnation  (Wells,  1993).  Often,  they 
tell  of  being  counseled  about  the  life  they  lived,  and  given  help  in 
planning  their following  lives.  Not  only  NDErs,  but also  a  large  group 
of past life regression  hypnotherapists  (for example,  Whitton,  1986)  and 
several  major religious  traditions  accept  the  doctrine  of reincarnation.  
Ian  Stevenson  has  also  uncovered  several  types  of  evidence  relating 

Todd  Murphy  is  an associate  researcher  with  the  Behavioral  Neurosciences  Program 
at  Laurentian  University  under  the  direction  of  Michael  A.  Persinger,  Ph.D.  Buddhist 
Imprimatur granted  for  this paper  by  His  Holiness  Samdech  Preah  Mahaghoshananda, 
to 
The  Supreme  Patriarch  of  Cambodia.  Reprint  requests  should  be  addressed 
Mr.  Murphy  at P.O.  Box  170414,  San Francisco,  CA 94117;  e-mail:  brainsci@jps.net.

Journal of Near-Death  Studies,  20(2),  Winter  2001 

2001  Human  Sciences  Press,  Inc.

101

102

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

to  reincarnation  (Stevenson,  1974,  1997).  The  pressures  favoring  the 
exploration  of reincarnation  as  a postulate  in the  explanation  of NDEs 
are growing.  Although polls have  found  25 percent of Americans  believe 
in rebirth, the  figure reaches  nearly  100 percent  in other cultures,  most 
importantly  in  the  Hindu  and  Buddhist worlds.  

It should  come  as  no  surprise  that  traditional  paradigms  for rebirth 
do  not  describe  NDEs.  Those  theories  were  more  likely  devised  to 
account  for  experiences  during  meditation  rather  than  the  experience 
of death.  The  database  of death-related  experiences  was  almost  non
existent,  while  the  database  of mystical  and  transcendent  experiences 
was  quite  large.  The  idea  was  that  those  who  went  deeply  into  medi
tation  were  able  to  see  "beyond  death's  door,"  and  that  spiritual 
practice  was  a  way  to  defeat  death  by  breaking  the  cycle  of  rebirth.  
Descriptions  of  meditation  experiences  were  used,  it  appears,  as 
templates  from  which  speculations  about  death  were  traced.  Indeed, 
there is some  overlap between  the phenomenologies  of NDEs  and medi
tation  experiences.  The  theory  of  rebirth  was  never  formulated  to 
account  for  NDEs,  but  some  reasonable  parameters  can  be  imposed 
on it,  allowing  an  exploratory  hypothesis  to  be  formulated.  

One  such  parameter  is  derived  from  the  Darwinian  theory  of 
natural  selection.  According  to  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  we 
must  be  able  to  explain  rebirth  as  an  adaptation  that  contributed 
to  our  survival  at  some  point  in  the  history  of  our  species.  If  so, 
then  the  specific  mechanisms  by  which  it  operates  must  be  the 
same  for  everyone,  because  we  all  share  a  common  evolutionary 
ancestry.  The  first  principle  of a  Darwinian  rebirth  hypothesis  can  be 
stated  thus:  Information that enables individuals to  survive  remains 
following death in discreet, coherent packets, and other individuals still 
undergoing prenatal development  elsewhere are sensitively dependent 
upon information in  these packets for their development.  

A  reasonable  postulate  is:  Each person experiences the  same state of 
consciousness prior to the cessation of subjective experience. This  implies 
that  the  "point of  no  return"  reported  by  many  NDErs,  beyond  which 
they  felt  resuscitation  would  have  been  impossible,  is  a  manifestation 
of a  state  of consciousness  that  will  eventually  appear  in  each  death
process  unless  it is  interrupted,  often  eliciting  an NDE  report.  

Although  there  appears  to  be  a  universal  grammar  to  NDEs,  the 
specific  vocabulary  of  any  given  case  is  determined  by  a  variety 
of  factors,  including  age,  culture,  the  specific  circumstances  of  the 
person's  death,  psychological  history,  and  possibly  many  other  factors

TODD  MURPHY

103

still  undiscovered.  The  specific  phenomenology  of  any  particular 
instance  of a  "point of no return"-its  vocabulary-will  be  confabulated 
individually  according  to  these  and  other  factors;  but  the  underlying 
state  of consciousness  will  be  the  same.  
If  the  final  state  of  consciousness 

in  each  life  is  the  same  for 
everyone,  then  the  NDE  must  access  that  state  from  whatever  state 
of consciousness  a  person  happens  to  be  in  at the  onset of  death,  even 
if it  is  accompanied  by  pain  or  fear.  No  one  knows  how  or when  he  or 
she  will  die,  or  what  state  of consciousness  he  or she  will  be in  when  it 
happens.  The  circumstances  of death  appear  at random,  and  can  vary 
widely  from  person  to  person.  I  propose  that  NDEs  are  the  subjective 
experience  of  having  one's  randomly-appearing  state  of consciousness 
at  the  time  of death  brought,  in  stages,  to  the  nonrandom  life  review 
and  "point of no  return." 

Algorithms  and NDEs 

Any  process  that  converts  randomness  to  nonrandomness  is  called 
an  algorithm.  According  to  Daniel  Dennett,  "An algorithm  is  a certain 
sort  of  formal  process  that  can  be  counted  on-logically-to  yield  a 
certain  sort  of result  whenever  it is  'run' or  instantiated"  (1995,  p.  50).  
Dennett  wrote  that  there  are  three  key  features  that  characterize  an 
algorithmic  process: 

"1.  substrate  neutrality: The  procedure  for  long  division  works 
equally  well with pencil  or pen,  paper or parchment,  neon lights 
or  skywriting,  using  any  logical  system  you  like.  The  power  of 
the  procedure  is  due  to its  logical structure,  not just  the  causal 
powers of the materials  used in the instantiation, just  so  long as 
those  causal  powers  permit  the  prescribed  steps  to  be  followed 
exactly.  

2.  underlying  mindlessness: Although  the  overall  design  of  the 
procedure  may  be  brilliant,  or  yield  brilliant  results,  each 
constituent  step,  as  well  as  the  transition  between  steps,  is 
utterly simple.  How simple?  Simple enough  for a  dutiful idiot  to 
perform-or for a straightforward  mechanical  device to  perform.  
The standard textbook  analogy  notes  that algorithms  are recipes 
of sorts,  designed  to  be  followed  by  novice  cooks.  A  recipe  book 
written for  great  chefs  might include  the  phrase  "Poach  the  fish

104

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

in  a suitable  wine  until almost  done,"  but  the  algorithm  for the 
same  process might  begin,  "Choose  a  white  wine  that  says  'dry' 
on  the  label;  take  a  corkscrew  and  open  the  bottle;  pour  an 
inch  of wine  in  the bottom  of a pan;  turn the  burner under  the 
pan on  high;..."-a tedious  breakdown of the  process  into  dead
simple  steps,  requiring no  wise  decisions  or  delicate  judgments 
or intuitions  on  the  part of the  recipe-reader.  

3.  guaranteed results: Whatever  it  is  that  an  algorithm  does,  it 
always  does  it, if it is executed  without  misstep. An  algorithm  is 
a foolproof recipe." (Dennett,  1950,  pp.  50-51) 

NDEs  can  be  seen  as  demonstrating  these  features.  Substrate 
neutrality emerges  if  we  assume  that  the  state-specific  character  of 
hallucinations  also  applies  to  NDEs.  Hallucinations  are  dependent 
on  states  of  consciousness  (Horowitz  and  Adams,  1970).  The  same 
state  of consciousness  can  produce  different  phenomena  in  different 
individuals.  The  breathtaking  variety  of  NDE  phenomena  might  be 
manifestations  of just  a few  states  of consciousness.  

Mardi  Horowitz  and  John  Adams  (1970)  have  theorized  that  the 
hallucinatory  phenomena  associated  with  complex  partial  seizures 
arise  as  expressions  of altered  states  of consciousness.  The  similarities 
between  NDE  phenomena  and  temporal  lobe  epileptic  symptoms  have 
been noted by several  researchers  (Saavedra-Aguilar  and G6mez-Jeria, 
1989;  Persinger,  1994).  Thus  we  can  reasonably  suppose  that  similar 
mechanisms  might be operating  in NDEs and in temporal lobe  epilepsy.  
If  so,  then  it  follows  that  Horowitz  and  Adams'  conclusion  might 
also  apply  to  NDEs.  If we  choose  to  make  that  assumption,  then  the 
series  of experiences  that  constitute  NDEs  is  better  understood  as  a 
series  of states  of consciousness.  The underlying  "mindless"  apparatus 
that  brings  dying  persons  to  the  "point  of  no  return"  operates  on 
their  states  of consciousness,  and  the  succeeding  experiences  are  the 
phenomenological  correlates.  The bewildering  variety of NDE phenom
ena,  as  I shall  describe  below,  can  be resolved  into  a few  basic  states  of 
consciousness,  each  of which  has a  specific  function.  

Underlying  mindlessness  can  be  derived  from  the  observation 
that  NDErs  find  themselves  undergoing  succeeding  stages  of  their 
experience  automatically.  NDErs  do  not  report  that  they  "willed" 
themselves  into  the  tunnel,  for  example.  That  NDEs  are  outside  the 
control  of their  experiencers,  together with  the  observation  that there

TODD  MURPHY

105

are significant  similarities in  many NDEs,  suggests  that they follow  an 
automatic  sequencing.  

I have  already  made Dennett's  third feature  of algorithmic  processes, 
guaranteed results, a  postulate  of this  model:  The  guaranteed  result is 
the "point of no  return"  and eventual  rebirth.  

Patterns in NDEs 

There  seem  to  be  certain  grammatical  rules  governing  NDEs.  
Although  the research  elucidating  them is  far from complete,  a  pattern 
of rough "rules of thumb"  appears  to be  emerging.  Examples  include: 

1.  In  India,  the  death  process  often  begins  not  with  an  auto

scopic  out-of-body  experience  (OBE)  but  rather  with  "seeing" 
messengers  of death whose summons  must be answered  (Murphy, 
2001;  Pasricha  and  Stevenson,  1986).  There  are,  however,  some 
Indian  NDEs  that  begin  with  an  OBE  (Blackmore,  1993).  The 
same  rule  applies  to Thai  NDEs (Murphy,  2001).  

2.  Those  younger  than  seven  years  old  often  avoid  the  life  review 

and instead  visit  heaven  or  a fairyland  (Serdahely,  1990).  

3.  In  preliterate  cultures,  the  life  review  is  often  replaced  by  a 
visit  to  a  spirit  world  in  which  significant  events  of  the  dying 
person's  life  manifest  symbolically,  as  features in the spirit world 
(Kellehear,  1993).  

4.  NDErs who have  been  able to  anticipate their death and to reflect 
extensively  on  their  life  often  do  not  experience  a  life  review; 
whereas  those  whose  death  appears  unexpectedly  usually  do 
review  their life  (Greyson,  1985).  

5.  NDErs  who  believe  strongly  in  a  particular  religious  tradition 
often  experience  the  being  of light  as  they  have  been  taught 
it  appears  (Osis  and  Haraldsson,  1977);  whereas  atheists  may 
experience  it  simply  as  a "presence." 

6.  NDErs  who believe  that "all  mysteries will  be  revealed  at  death" 
often  have  a  transcendent  experience  in  which  mysteries  are 
revealed  to  their  satisfaction  (for  example,  Brinkley  and  Perry, 
1994;  Eadie  and Taylor,  1992).  

7.  NDErs  who  need  help,  guidance,  or  an  escort  during  their 
experience  often  encounter  angels  (Lundahl,  1992)  or  Yamatoots 
in  long 
(Murphy,  2001)  who  may  engage 
discussions  in which  their  concerns  are  dealt  with.

the  experiencers 

106

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

8.  NDErs  who  need  reassurance  that  it  is  all  right  to  be  dead 
often  encounter  deceased  relatives  and  beloved  friends.  Joyful 
reunions  with  beloved  friends  who  have  passed  may  facilitate 
positive  affect  in  postmortem  states  of consciousness.  Those  too 
young  to  have  deceased  friends  but  have  lost  a  pet  may  see 
the  pet  instead  (Serdahely,  1989-1990).  Those  who  have  not 
lost  a  pet  might  see  a  comforting  object  such  as  a  toy  (Morse, 
1994).  

9.  An NDEr whose  life was marked by destructive  behavior  patterns 
may  experience  a  life  review  affectively  widened  to  include  the 
effects  of those behaviors  on others  (Atwater,  1994;  Brinkley  and 
Perry,  1994).  

This  list  of  "rules  of  thumb"  is  both  speculative  and  incomplete.  
Each  item  on  the  list  should  be  regarded  as  an  approximation  of 
a  real  "grammatical  rule"  that  influences  the  algorithmic  progess  of 
NDEs.  It  is  not  possible  at  present  to  list  a  series  of  rules  that  will 
explain  the  functional  connections  between  specific  NDE  features  and 
their  predisposing  factors.  Craig  Lundahl  (1993)  delineated  a  series 
of NDE  rules  that  addressed  the  likelihoods  of  NDE  features,  but  not 
their  functional  roles.  In  any  case,  it  must  be  emphasized  that  the 
rules  or  axioms  that  govern  NDEs  will  be  applicable  not  so  much 
to  the  experiences  themselves  as  to  the  states  of  consciousness  that 
produce  them.  

The  different  representations  of  the  different  phases  of  NDEs 
presumably  reflect  differences  in  set,  age,  culture,  health,  and  so  on 
between  individuals  experiencing  the  same  state.  For  example,  the 
life  review  can  occur  in  various  NDEs  as  a  serial  re-experiencing  of 
one's  life,  a  viewing  of multiple  television  screens  (Atwater,  1994),  the 
experience  of "watching  one's  life  pass before  one's  eyes,"  or  a  summary 
of only  one's  significant  life  events.  These  dramatic  differences  might 
be  accounted  for  by  theorizing  that each  represents  the  most  efficient 
phenomenology  for  the state  that produces  it  for that  individual.  

Karma and the  Life  Review 

A  feature  in  every  tradition  that  preserves  the  doctrine  of  rebirth 
or  reincarnation  is  the  idea  of karma.  In  order  to  adopt  karma  as  a 
legitimate  category  in building  a theory  of NDEs,  we  need to  reduce  it 
to its simplest terms. The traditional  teachings  on karma  are filled with

TODD  MURPHY

107

implications.  Nevertheless,  one  meaningful  statement 
unfalsifiable 
may  be  derived  from  these  traditions: Individual  behaviors  in  one  life 
can have  an impact  on  subsequent  lives.  The  theory  of natural selection 
requires that the  postulated death and rebirth process  should  increase 
chances  for  survival  in  some  way.  That is,  if behaviors  in  one  life  can 
influence  those  of another, that influence  must tend to  make  behaviors 
in  the  later  life  more  adaptive.  Natural  selection  has  no  foresight; 
adaptations  are  permanent  traits  that preserve  past  expediencies.  If 
we  really  do  reincarnate, we  are being  reborn not towards  nirvana, but 
rather away  from extinction.  

For  human  behavior  to  become  more  adaptive  it  must  do  so  first 
with  respect  to  our  cultural  environments,  because  the  evaluation  of 
behavior is  both culture-bound and culture-specific.  A  second  principle 
for  a  Darwinian  rebirth  hypothesis  emerges  and  can  be  stated  as 
follows:  States  that  facilitate  adaptive  behavior  in  a  given  cultural 
environment  in one  life  tend  be  repeated  in following  lives,  and  states 
that facilitate  maladaptive  behavior tend  to  be  avoided.  

For  the  present  work,  I  shall  call  this  the  rule  of  karma.  I  will 
call  the  records  of  specific  states  that  facilitate  or  suppress  behavior 
karma.  It follows  that the  function  of  rebirth may  be  to  pre-adapt  us 
to our cultural environments.  However,  the conclusion  that karmas are 
reborn in no way  implies  that human beings are  reincarnated, however 
comforting  the  idea  might  be.  

In order for karmas to be  transmitted from a dying  person to  an infant 
or  fetus,  they  must  be  broadcast  in  some  way.  It  seems  reasonable  to 
suppose  that karma of a living  person  differs  from that of a person  who 
has gone  past the "point of no  return" in the  way  it is  stored-although 
not in the information it contains.  A piece  of computer software  contains 
the  same  information  whether  it is  stored  on  a  disk  or  actually  being 
used  in  the  computer's  microprocessor.  Likewise,  the  recorded  states 
of  consciousness  are  the  same  whether  the  karmic  records  are  in 
our  brains  or  downloading  to  a  subsequent  birth.  The  "point  of  no 
return" might  be  likened  to  the  point  at  which  a  computer  program 
is transferred from its random-access  memory (RAM)  to  a disk.  The life 
review,  I  suggest,  is  the  phenomenological  manifestation  of  a  state  of 
consciousness  that creates,  from  the  effects  of  states  of  consciousness 
experienced  in one  lifetime,  suggestions  for states  that enable  adaptive 
behavior  during the  next  life.  

The  life  review  can  lead  NDErs  to  re-examine  everything  they  have 
ever  done,  not  as  they  remember their experiences,  but approximately

108

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

they  remember  having  done 
as  they  actually  happened.  When 
something  adaptive,  and that  recollection  induces  positive  affect,  the 
correlative  state is  marked  for repetition  in  their  next life.  When  they 
remember  having  done  something  maladaptive,  and  that  recollection 
makes  them  feel bad,  the state is  marked  for  suppression  in their  next 
life.  Because  it  is  one's  culture  that  designates  what  is  good  or  bad, 
the  possibility  arises  that the  life  reviews  sorts  states according  to how 
likely they are to  generate culturally  adaptive  behavior.  The  life  review 
must  focus  on  behavior  because  behaviors  are  state-specific;  states  of 
consciousness  cannot  be  viewed  directly,  but  the  behaviors  that  act 
them  out  can.  Re-experiencing  an  event  will  invoke  the  state  one  was 
in at the  time  of the  event.  

Culture and NDEs 

The  reason  so  many  NDEs  features  are  culture-bound  may  be  that 
the  death process  is an evolutionary  adaption  favoring those  who  "take 
rebirth,"  specifically  by  enhancing  their  ability  to  gain  status  in  the 
complex  cultures  that  appeared  in  our  recent  evolution.  Individuals 
who  cannot  follow  the  rules  do  not  acquire  much  status.  Karma, 
I  suggest,  is  a  set  of  positively  and  negatively  reinforced  states  of 
consciousness  that  enable  adaptive  behaviors.  Having  karma  might 
give individuals an advantage not only in surviving but also in following 
cultural  rules,  eliminating  an  important  obstacle  to  achieving  rank.  
Individuals with high  status have better chances  of producing  offspring 
than  those  with  low  status.  The  effects  of rebirth  would  be  amplified 
over time  if the first individuals  'taking' rebirth  consistently  rose to the 
top of the  social  ladder.  I  suggest that those  who had life  reviews  at  the 
end of one life  were  more  likely  to be  reborn  to become  dominant alpha 
individuals,  with  better  mating  opportunities  than  betas and  deltas.  
The  culture-bound  character  of NDEs could  be  a case  of form  following 
function.  Karma  can  change  as  culture  changes.  A  state  approved  in 
one cultural  context might  be avoided  following  cultural  change.  

"Hellish" NDEs 

One important  pattern emerging  is that some NDEs  involve profound 
negative  affect.  These  "hellish"  experiences  bear  striking  structural 
similarities  to positive  ones.  P.  M.  H.  Atwater  commented:  "During  my

TODD  MURPHY

109

own interviews  of experiencers  ...  I  discovered  little difference  between 
heavenly  and  hellish  near-death  episodes  in  consideration  of  how 
elements  unfolded  in sequence"  (1994,  p.  40).  

Lysergic  acid  diethylamide  (LSD),  which  usually  induces  a pleasant 
experience,  can  also  produce  a  negative  or hellish  ordeal.  Because  the 
same  chemical  can  lead  to  both  types  of  experience,  it  seems  unlikely 
that  any  specific  affect  is integral  to  the  LSD  experience.  The  same  is 
true for seizures  in temporal lobe  epilepsy (LaPlante,  1993).  If Horowitz 
and  Adams'  (1970)  hypothesis  applies to  NDEs  as  it does  to  LSD,  then 
the  possibility  that negative  affect  is integral  to  unpleasant  NDEs  can 
be  reasonably  ruled  out.  The  best  candidate  for  the  cause  of  hellish 
NDEs  in our model  is  resistance, as  I  shall  describe  below.  

Neurology 

The  source  of the  hellish  affect  is  another  question.  Temporal  lobe 
research  by  Michael  Persinger  (1994)  suggests  that  single  states 
of  consciousness  can  evoke  very  different  affects  and  implies  that 
temporal  lobe  affects  may  be  implicated  in  both  hellish  and  blissful 
NDEs.  

The  involvement  of  the  brain's  temporal  lobes  in  NDEs  appears 
to  be  well  established.  Persinger  (1987)  has  theorized  that  when 
our  species  first  evolved  its  unique  cognitive  abilities,  two  parts  of 
our  brains  enlarged  disproportionately:  the  frontal  lobes,  generally 
specialized  for  extrapolating  into  the  future,  and  the  temporal  lobes, 
generally  specialized  for  remembering  the  past.  Those  developments 
allowed  people  to  remember  death  and  to  realize  that  the  same 
thing  would  happen  to  them  in  the  future.  That  upgrade  included 
a  software  for  death  anxiety.  However,  the  adaptive  value  of  being 
able  to  project  into  the  future,  to  imagine  ways  of dying  and  so  avoid 
them,  would  have  been  canceled  out  by  the  dysphoria  it  would  also 
have produced.  A compensatory  mechanism  seems to have  appeared  at 
the  same  time.  Arnold  Mandell  speculated  on  "affective  specialization 
in  the  lateralization  of the  brain,  with  'negative'  emotions  like  fear 
and  paranoia  and  dysphoric  feelings  like  sorrow  and  depression 
lying...  [in].... the  left  temporal  lobe,  and with the  mute,  geometrically 
cognitive,  musical  right temporal lobe  specialized  for joy"  (1980,  p.  411).  
Mandell's  argument  refers  to  the  temporal  cortex.  Melvin  Morse 
contends  that  portions  of  the  right  temporal  lobe  mediate  the  entire 
NDE experience,  calling  it the "circuit boards  of mysticism"  (Morse  and 
Perry,  1992).  The  left  temporal  cortex's  functions,  on  the  other  hand,

110

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

include  profound  negative  affect.  Wilder  Penfield  and  Herbert Jasper, 
discussing  the  results  of  electrical  stimulation  of  the  temporal  lobe 
surface,  described  unpleasant  emotions: 

These  ictal  emotions  which  patients  described  as  fear,  fright,  scared 
feeling,  terror,  sadness,  loneliness...  [which]...  may  be  said  to  have 
ganglionic  representation  within  the  fissure  of  Sylvius  and  their 
underlying  circular  sulcus....  The  ictal  emotion  is  produced  as  a 
distinct  experience  and  is  the  result  of  localized  cortical  discharge.  
(Penfield  and Jasper,  1954,  p.  451).  

Illustrations  accompanying  this  text  showed  that it referred to  the  left 
temporal cortex.  

These  findings  suggest  that  the  reason  some  NDEs  are  hellish  is 
that the  positive  affect  of most  NDEs,  originating in  the right temporal 
cortex,  is replaced  by negative  affect  from the left temporal  cortex.  This 
hypothesis,  if true,  it might  explain  how  an  NDE  can  be  unpleasant, 
but not why  it is  so.  

Psychology 

I  propose  that  one  reason  some  NDEs  are  unpleasant  is  that  the 
person  is  resisting  the  death  process.  Atwater  (1994)  suggested  that 
unpleasant NDEs  are related to an individual history of repressed guilt, 
while  Bruce  Greyson  and  Nancy  Bush's  (1992)  accounts  of distressing 
NDEs  all  contain  comments  to  the  effect  that the  person  did  not want 
to  die.  The  most  commonly  reported  emotion  in  unpleasant  NDEs  is 
fear.  Whether  the  crucial  factor  is  guilt  or  fear,  both  feelings  inspire 
resistance.  This  idea,  together  with  the  algorithmic  interpretation of 
NDEs  I  am  proposing  here,  implies  that a  specific  affective  state  must 
be  achieved.  That affective  state,  I  suggest,  is  surrender,  the  opposite 
of  resistance.  I  do  not  propose  that  surrender must  be  achieved  only 
to  experience  the  "point of  no  return"; rather,  I  suggest  that  it  also 
might  enable  the  life  review.  In  this  interpretation  of  NDEs,  each 
phenomenon  is  an expression  of a state of consciousness,  and each  state 
of consciousness  has the  specific  function  of increasing the  likelihood  of 
reaching first the life  review,  and then the  "point of no  return." The  life 
review  is  less  anomalous  as  a result  of natural selection,  if it is  seen  as 
contributing to  the  success  of  those  who  undergo  rebirth.  

If all  NDEs  not  interrupted by  resuscitation  go  through some  form 
of  the  life  review,  then  I  suggest  that  any  negative  affect  must  be 
changed  to a positive  one  before  life  review  is  achieved.  The  life  review 
can  require  that  a  person  examine,  re-experience,  or  witness  his  or

TODD  MURPHY

111

her  own  maladaptive  behavior.  When  this  same  thing  happens  in 
psychotherapy,  it often  evokes  resistance.  Resistance  in psychotherapy 
often  occurs  in  conjunction  with  negative  affect;  if  it  were  to  occur 
during  the  death  process,  the  experience  might  also  be  unpleasant.  
As  noted  above,  Atwater  (1994)  suggested  that  hellish  NDEs  are  a 
result  of  repressed  guilt,  while  Greyson  and  Bush's  (1992)  cases  of 
distressing  NDEs  all  contained  allusions  to  not  wanting  to  die.  Both 
of  these  mechanisms  implicated  in  hellish  NDEs  may  be  grouped 
together as resistance.  Resistance hinders  meaningful  self-examination 
in  psychotherapy;  perhaps  it  does  the  same  during life  reviews.  

Hell: Special case #1.  Not all negative  NDEs  are necessarily  the  pro
duct  of  resistance.  A  different  type  of negative  affect  might  arise  in 
conjunction  with  the  life  review,  as  in  the  case  recounted  by  a  for
mer  Vietnam  War  assassin  (Brinkley  and  Perry,  1994).  The  following 
narrative  suggests  a symbolic,  aversive  life  review: 

I was unconscious  to all onlookers,  yet something weird was happening 
to  me.... I  was  in  a  circle  of  light.  I  looked  down  upon  the  accident 
scene....  I looked into my  car and saw myself trapped and unconscious.  
I  saw several  cars  stop  and a lady  taking my children  to  her car  to  sit 
and  rest  until  the  ambulance  would  arrive....  A  hand  touched  mine, 
and I  turned  to  see  where  this peace  and serenity  and blissful  feeling 
was coming  from...  and there  was Jesus Christ-I mean  the way  he is 
made  out  to  be  in  all  the  paintings-and  I  never  wanted  to  leave  this 
man  and  this  place.  

I  was  led  around  to  a  well,  because  I  wanted  to  stay  with  him  and 
hold  his  hand.  He  led  me  from  a  side  of  bliss  to  a  side  of  misery.  
I  did  not  want  to  look,  but  he  made  me  look-and  I  was  disgusted 
and  horrified  and  scared  ... it was  so  ugly.  The people  were  blackened 
and  sweaty  and  moaning  in  pain  and  chained  to  their  spots.  And  I 
had to  walk  through  the  area  back  to  the  well.  One  was even  chained 
to  the  evil  side  of  the  well....I  wanted  them  to  help  him,  but  no 
one  would-and  I  knew  that  I  would  be  one  of  these  creatures  if 
I  stayed.  I  hated  it  there.  I  couldn't  wait  to  get  to  the  well  and  go 
around  it.  He  led  me  to  it,  but  he  made  me  go  through  it  alone  as  he 
watched....  

I leaned  over the well....  There were  three children calling "Mommie, 
Mommie,  Mommie,  we need  you.  Please  come  back to us."  ...  The little 
girl  looked  up  at me  and begged  me  to  go  back  to  life-and  then  all  at 
once...  I  saw  the  accident  scene  again.... (Greyson  and  Bush,  1992, 
pp.  105-106) 

The  aversive  episode  in this NDE  centers  around  images  of children.  
It  is  possible  that  the  woman  in  this  case  wanted  to  have  a  child, 
or  more  children,  and  saw  her  life  in  terms  of  a  hell  in  which  she

112

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

was  to  rescue  the  souls  of unborn  children  by  bringing  them  into  the 
world.  This  unusual  life  review  makes  sense  if we  assume  that karma 
functions  to  increase  adaptive  behavior  from  one  life  to  the  next,  and 
that during most  of  our  evolutionary  history  raising  a  child  is  one  of 
the  most  adaptive  things  a  woman  could  do.  Even  though  her  review 
was confined  to only  one  assumed behavior-being  childless-resolving 
only  that  one  karma  in  her  next  life  by  having  a  child,  and  thus 
passing  on  her  genetic  material,  would  have  increased  dramatically 
the  adaptiveness  of her behavior  as  a  result of this  review.  

Hell:  Special case  #2.  One  phenomenon  that  does  not  appear  in 
typical,  pleasant  NDEs  is  the  experience  of  a  vacuum.  Although  the 
word  void  has  been  used  to  describe  it,  it does  not  seem  to be  the same 
as  the  void  that  occurs  in  the  stage  along  with  the  tunnel.  That  void 
associated  with  the  tunnel  often  induces  highly  positive  affect,  while 
the  vacuum  is,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  always  hellish.  One  experiencer 
described  the  vacuum  as  follows: 

It  was  empty...and  dark.  Not  like  night  dark,  somehow, 
it  was 
thinner-whatever  that  means.  It  was  very  dark  and  immense  all 
around,  but  somehow 
I  could  see  them  [tormenting  beings];  the 
voidness  seemed  to  thin  out  somewhere  off  by  the  horizon,...  but  it 
wasn't  lighter,  just thinner.  It  seemed  to  go  on  forever....  That utter 
emptiness  just  went  on  and  on....  there  didn't seem  to  be  any  end  of 
it,  and no  way  out.  (Greyson  and Bush,  1992,  p.  102) 

Other descriptions  include:  "suspended in a total vacuum  with nothing 
to  see  or do  for  eternity"  (Greyson  and  Bush,  1992,  p.  103)  and  "hours 
went  on  with  absolutely  no  sensation...there  was  no  hot,  no  cold, 
no  light,  no  taste,  no  smell,  no  sensation  whatsoever,  none,  other 
than...a  slight  sensation  of  travelling....it  became  unbearable,  it 
became  horrific" (Greyson  and Bush,  1992,  p.  104).  

The  majority  of  cases  of  the  vacuum  in  Greyson  and  Bush's 
study occurred during childbirth under anesthesia.  Perhaps pregnancy 
provides  a "fail-safe"  mechanism  that delays  the  onset  of the  "point of 
no  return" until  the  last  possible  moment.  Such  an  adaptation  would 
greatly  enhance  the  chances  for  survival  of  infants  born  to  mothers 
who  hemorrhaged  during  childbirth.  Deaths  due  to  violent  trauma  or 
old  age  were  probably  less  likely  to  end  in  resuscitation  than  those  in 
childbirth.  Historically,  a common  cause  of death  in childbirth  has been 
loss  of  blood;  but blood  can  be  replenished  easily,  and  death  thereby 
easily  reversed.  An  NDE  "fail-safe"  mechanism  for  childbirth  would 
increase  the  chances  for  survival  not  only  for  the  NDEr  but  for  her 
child  as  well.

TODD  MURPHY

113

Like  most NDE phenomena,  the vacuum does  not occur  only at death.  
It  has  also  been  found  in  sleep  paralysis,  a  neurological  disorder  that 
affects  the  ability  to  wake  up  (LaPlante,  1993).  In  these  cases,  the 
victims  find  themselves  suspended  in  a  vacuum,  trying  to  wake  up 
but  unable  to.  Because  both  sleep  and  death  involve  moving  through 
different  states of consciousness,  symptoms  occurring in sleep disorders 
might also  appear  in NDEs.  If so, the  vacuum,  occurring  in  both,  could 
be the phenomenon confabulated  out of the inability or unwillingness  to 
move from one state to another. That  hypothesis suggests  an interesting 
possibility:  that  the  adaptation  that  created  the  death  process  was 
a  new  application  of  the  neurological  mechanisms  that  previously 
had  been  responsible  only  for  sleep.  Both  processes  involve  multiple, 
sequenced  states of consciousness.  This  speculation  is lent credence  by 
reports  of NDEs induced  by  lucid dreaming  (Green,  1995;  Rogo,  1990).  

Speculations  on the  Functions  of Typical 
Phases  of NDEs 

Death  can  often  be  anticipated  in  protracted  terminal  illness,  and 
that  anticipation  can  have  an  impact  on  the  death  process.  Several 
researchers  have  demonstrated  increased  incidence  of  spontaneous 
altered  states  in the  period  shortly  before  a  person  approaches  death 
(Greyson,  1985;  Morse  and  Perry,  1994;  Osis  and  Haraldsson,  1977).  
Dying  patients  not  yet  at  the  brink  of death  frequently  report  seeing 
"the light"  in  their  rooms,  and  visitations  by  angels  and  beloved  dead 
friends  and relatives.  The appearance  of NDE phenomenology  in these 
premortem  periods implies  that  the  same  states  of consciousness  that 
appear during the death process can begin to operate whenever  a person 
becomes  cognizant  that his  or  her life  will  end.  When  people  who  have 
already  experienced  these  states  of  consciousness  begin  their  death 
process,  they will  be familiar  with  and  less  likely to  resist many  of the 
percepts  they  encounter.  

The OBE  at the beginning  of many  NDEs  might  function to  convince 
the  dying  person  that  he  or  she  is  dead.  Through  much  of  our 
evolutionary  history,  deaths  were  often  traumatic.  Males  often  died 
violently,  during  war  or on  hunts.  Women,  as  we  tend  to  forget  in  our 
safer,  modern  times,  often  died  in  childbirth.  Autoscopic  OBEs  would 
permit  the  experiencers  to  look  back  on  themselves  and  see  a  very 
distressed  corpse.  

In  Thailand  and  India,  on  the  other  hand,  NDEs  are  more  likely  to 
commence  with  a  visitation  by  a  Yamatoot,  a  messenger  of Yama,  the

114

JOURNAL  OF NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

lord  of the  dead  (Murphy,  2001;  Pasricha  and  Stevenson,  1986),  than 
with  an  OBE.  Resistance  to  the  summons  of  a  Yamatoot  is  futile.  
Fear  of Yamatoots  occurred  frequently  in  Karlis  Osis  and  Erlendur 
Haraldsson's  (1977)  study  of premortem  states  in India.  It  is  possible 
that  the  incidence  of distressing  NDEs  varies  from  one  culture  to  the 
next.  Within  Western  culture,  it is  also  possible  that in past  centuries, 
when many more death processes  were hellish than at present  (Greyson 
and  Bush,  1992),  the  Grim  Reaper  served  as  a  Western  analog  of 
a  Yamatoot,  and  that  Europeans  once  ran  from  the  Grim  Reaper  as 
Hindus  sometimes  run from  the Yamatoots  sent to  take  them.  

The  typical  "core"  NDE  progresses  to  the  tunnel  or  void  after  an 
autoscopic  OBE,  in  which  one  continues  to  sense  an  environment.  
These  experiences  might  indicate  that  sensory  perception  has  ended, 
and  that  the  defense  mechanisms  valid  in  states  that  accompany 
sensory  perception  are  now  obsolete.  The  symbolism  of the  tunnel  as 
a  transition  from  one  "world"  to  another  in  NDEs  has  already  been 
explored  (Chari,  1982).  Perhaps  the  tunnel  or  void  reflects  a  state  of 
consciousness  that  functions  to  take  one  from  sensory  perception  to 
wholly  endogenous  percepts.  

The appearance  of dead beloved friends  and relatives  might evoke the 
feeling  that  it is  all right  to  be  dead.  Feelings  of loneliness,  separation 
anxiety,  feelings  of being  abandoned,  guilt  at  leaving  those  who  are 
dependent  on  us,  or  grief  at  the  loss  of beloved  living  people  might 
be  mollified  by  the  creation  of an  inner,  death-contextualized,  social 
environment.  One  could  feel  safe  there  and  thus be less  likely  to resist 
out of fear.  

The  being of light,  which  typically  precedes  or  appears  at  the  same 

time  as  the  life  review,  might  function  to  prevent  resistance.  The  all
pervading  love  and  feelings  of acceptance  the  being  of  light  evokes  is 
incompatible  with  the  negative  affect  created  by  resistance.  

Conclusion 

NDEs  can  be  viewed  as  an  algorithmic  process  that alters  the  many 
states  of consciousness  possible  at the  time  of death  so  as  to  produce 
first,  the  life  review,  and  then  the  "point of  no  return."  There  can  be 
positive  or  negative  affect  in  any  near-death  state  of  consciousness, 
although  the  states  will  tend  toward  the  positive  affect  that decreases 
resistance  to the  experience.  I  propose that the  life  review has  a  special 
function:  to  sort  out  behaviors  to  repeat  in  future  lives  from  those  to 
avoid.

TODD  MURPHY

115

An  enormous  amount  of  work  needs  to  be  done  for  the  present 
hypothesis  to  be  developed  into a  theory.  The list  of grammatical  "rules 
of  thumb"  needs  to  find  a  more  rigorous  expression,  and  it  needs 
to  be  expanded  to  include  other  rules,  most  obviously  those  culture
bound  effects  specific  to  major cultural  groups.  Some  age-specific  NDE 
features  have  been  noted,  but  there  may  be  features  characteristic  of 
specific  phases  of  life:  Are  there  common  elements  in  the  NDEs  of 
newlyweds,  of adolescents,  of pregnant  women?  A classification  system 
for  the  factors  that  influence  the  sucession  of states  of  consciousness 
needs  to  be  devised  and  tested,  beyond  the  obvious  factors  of  age, 
culture,  psychological  set at time of death, expectations  regarding what 
death  will  feel  like,  and  the  length  of time  one  has  to  anticipate  one's 
death.  When  we  consider  how  young  and  how  poorly  funded  NDE 
research is,  it seems  reasonable  to assume  that there are determinative 
influences  still  waiting to  be  discovered.  

Predictions  and Applications 

Before  considering  the  potential  applications  of  my  hypothesis,  we 
should  note that  the validity  of an  hypothesis  is determined  not by  its 
initial  applicability  but rather  by its  falsifiability.  One  prediction  of the 
present  hypothesis  is  that  NDEs  of  all  cultures  will  exhibit  a  typical 
sequence.  The  notion  that  karma  is  a  set  of states  of consciousness, 
coupled  with  observations  that there  are  magnetic  components  and/or 
bases  for  states  of consciousness  (Persinger,  1994),  predicts  that  the 
brain  might emit  magnetic  signals  at  some  point  in the  death  process.  
If these signals  are propagated  within  the  earth's  magnetic  field,  then 
we  are  left  with  the  prediction  that  the  intensity  of  these  signals 
should  be  within  the range  of the constant  (steady-state)  values  for the 
geomagnetic  field  (Persinger,  1995).  If so,  then  the  geomagnetic  field 
might  serve  as  the  medium  for  karmic  signals.  Interactions  between 
geomagnetic  phenomena  and  NDE  experiences  have  been  noted  in  the 
literature  (Persinger,  1995).  Failure  to  find  such  signals  emitted  from 
a  dying  brain  (once  we  have  developed  the  technology  to  read  them) 
would  cast doubt  on  my hypothesis.  

A  research  implication  of the  algorithmic  NDE  hypothesis  is  that 
NDE  phenomena  need  to  be  catalogued  in  order  to  provide  a  database 
to  analyze  and  classify  the  states  of 
that  can  allow  researchers 
consciousness  involved in dying.  Eventually,  perhaps,  therapists  might 
devise  treatments  for  the  post-NDE  personality  syndrome  (Atwater, 
1988)  directed  not  at  the  aftereffects  of  NDEs  but  rather  at  the

116

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES

aftereffects  of the  specific  states  of consciousness  experienced  during 
specific  events.  The  understanding  that  death  will  involve  multiple 
states  of consciousness,  each  one  played  out  as  a  distinct  experience 
with  deeply  meaningful  content,  may  reduce  death  anxiety  in  those 
terminally  ill  people  who  experience  premortem  altered  states  of con
sciousness.  For  example,  understanding  the  functions  of the  various 
kinds  of  hellish  NDEs  might  lead 
in  premortem 
psychology  that  would  allow  the  identification  of  those  at  risk  and 
counseling  to  reduce  their  risk.  If premortem  and  postmortem  altered 
states  are  as  similar as  their  similar  phenomenologies  imply,  then  the 
affects  associated  with  those  states  before  death  will  be  the  ones  most 
likely  to occur  after  death.  

to  techniques 

One  final  distant  possibility,  so  improbable  as  to  invite  dismissal  by 
many scientists,  could nevertheless  produce vast benefits for humanity.  
Purportedly  miraculous  cures  are sometimes  reported following NDEs.  
Terminally  ill  patients  sometimes  report  that  they  were  visited  by 
an  angel  who  told  them  they  were  healed,  and  thereafter  there  was 
no  sign  of  a  tumor  or  their  T-cell  counts  rose  dramatically.  Isolation 
of  the  state  of  consciousness  associated  with  this  phenomenon  and 
identification  of its manifestations  and predisposing  factors might  open 
up  avenues  of  research  into  "miraculous"  cures.  Recognition  that  such 
miracles  are  correlates  of  specific  states  of consciousness  might  allow 
common  factors  associated  with  such  cures  to  be  discerned,  which 
might in turn  suggest  ways  to  induce  those  states  in  a clinical  setting.  
Chinese  medical  tradition  has  recorded  many  such  cures  associated 
with  poisonous  mushrooms,  some  of which,  in small  enough  doses,  act 
as  hallucinogens  (Bernard Yeh,  personal  communication,  1988).  Many 
NDE  phenomena  have  been  induced  in  a  laboratory  setting  by  the 
application  of low-intensity  complex  magnetic  signals  to  the  temporal 
lobes (Ruttan, Persinger,  and Koren,  1990).  If the  state of consciousness 
in  which  miraculous  cures  occur  can  be  induced  by  stimulation  of  the 
temporal  lobes  with magnetic  signals,  the induction  of such states could 
be  added to  the  tools  of modern  medicine.  

References 

Atwater, P.  M. H.  (1988).  Coming back  to life: The after-effects of the near-death experience.  

New  York,  NY:  Dodd,  Mead.  

Atwater,  P.  M.  H.  (1994).  Beyond  the  light: What  isn't being said about the  near-death 

experience. New  York,  NY:  Birch  Lane Press.

TODD  MURPHY

117

Blackmore,  S.  J.  (1993).  Near-death  experiences  in India: They have tunnels too.  Journal 

of Near-Death  Studies,  11,  205-217.  

Brinkley,  D.,  and Perry,  P.  (1994).  Saved  by  the  light:  The  true  story  of a man  who  died 

twice  and the  profound  revelations  he  received.  New  York,  NY:  Villard.  

Chari,  C.  T.  K.  (1982).  Parapsychological  reflections  on  some  tunnel  experiences.  

Anabiosis:  The  Journal of Near-Death  Studies,  2,  110-131.  

Dennett,  D.  C.  (1995).  Darwin's  dangerous idea.  New  York,  NY:  Simon  and Schuster.  
Eadie,  B.  J., and Taylor,  C.  (1992).  Embraced  by  the light.  Placerville,  CA:  Gold  Leaf Press.  
Green,  J.  T.  (1995).  Lucid  dreams  as  one  method  of  replicating  components  of  the near
death experience  in  a  laboratory setting.  Journal of Near-Death  Studies,  14,  49-59.  
Greyson,  B.  (1985).  A typology  of near-death experiences.  American Journal of Psychiatry, 

142,  967-969.  

Greyson,  B.,  and Bush,  N.  E.  (1992).  Distressing  near-death  experiences.  Psychiatry,  55, 

95-110.  

Horowitz,  M.  J.,  and Adams,  J.  E.  (1970).  Hallucinations  on  brain stimulation:  Evidence 
for  revision  of  the  Penfield  hypothesis.  In  W.  Keup  (Ed.),  Origin  and  mechanisms  of 
hallucinations (pp.  13-22).  New  York,  NY:  Plenum  Press.  

Kellehear,  A.  (1993).  Culture,  biology,  and  the  near-death  experience:  A  reappraisal.  

Journal of Nervous  and Mental  Disease,  181,  148-156.  
LaPlante,  E.  (1993).  Seized.  New  York,  NY:  HarperCollins.  
Lundahl,  C. R.  (1992).  Angels  in near-death  experiences.  Journal of Near-Death  Studies, 

11,  49-56.  

Lundahl,  C.  R.  (1993).  The  near-death experience:  A  theoretical  summarization.  Journal 

of Near-Death  Studies,  12,  105-118.  

Mandell,  A.  J. (1980).  Toward a psychobiology  of transcendence:  God in  the brain. In J.  M.  
Davidson  and R.  J.  Davidson  (Eds.),  The psychobiology  of consciousness  (pp.  379-464).  
New  York,  NY:  Plenum.  

Morse,  M.  L.  (1994).  Near-death  experiences  and  death-related  visions  in  children: 

Implications  for  the  clinician.  Current Problems  in  Pediatrics,  24,  55-83.  

Morse,  M.  L.,  and  Perry,  P.  (1992).  Transformed  by  the  light:  The  powerful  effects  of 

near-death experiences  on  people's  lives.  New  York,  NY:  Villard.  

Morse,  M.  L.,  and  Perry,  P.  (1994).  Parting  visions:  Uses  and  meanings  of pre-death, 

psychic,  and spiritual experiences.  New  York,  NY:  Villard.  

Murphy,  T.  (2001).  Near-death  experiences  in  Thailand.  Journal of Near-Death  Studies, 

19,  161-178.  

Osis,  K.,  and Haraldsson, E.  (1977).  At  the hour of death.  New  York,  NY:  Avon.  
Pasricha,  S.,  and  Stevenson,  I.  (1986).  Near-death  experiences  in  India:  A  preliminary 

report. Journal of Nervous  and Mental  Disease,  174,  165-170.  

Penfield,  W.,  and  Jasper,  H.  (1954).  Epilepsy  and the functional  anatomy  of the  human 

brain.  Boston,  MA:  Little,  Brown.  

Persinger,  M.  A.  (1987).  Neuropsychological  bases  of God  beliefs.  New  York,  NY:  Praeger.  
Persinger,  M.  A.  (1994).  Near-death  experiences:  Determining  the  neuroanatomical 
pathways  by  experiential  patterns  and  simulation  in  experimental  settings.  In 
(Ed.),  Le  processus  de  gu#rison:  Par-deld  la  souffrance  ou  la  mort 
L.  Bessette 
[Healing:  Beyond  suffering  and  death]  (pp.  277-286).  Beauport,  Canada:  MNH 
Publications.  

Persinger, M.A.  (1995).  Out-of-body  experiences  are more probable  in people  with elevated 
complex  partial epileptic-like  signs  during  periods  of enhanced  geomagnetic  activity.  
Perceptual  and Motor  Skills,  80,  563-569.  

Rogo,  D.  S.  (1990).  An  experimentally-induced  NDE  [Letter].  Journal of Near-Death 

Studies,  8,  257-260.  

Ruttan,  L.  A.,  Persinger,  M.  A.,  and  Koren,  S.  (1990).  Enhancement  of  temporal  lobe
related  experiences  during  brief  exposures  to  milligause  intensity  extremely 
low 
frequency  magnetic  fields.  Journal of Bioelectricity,  9,  33-54.

118 

JOURNAL  OF  NEAR-DEATH  STUDIES 

Saavedra-Aguilar,  J.  C.,  and  G6mez-Jeria,  J.  S.  (1989).  A  neurobiological  model  for near

death  experiences.  Journal of Near-Death Studies,  7,  205-222.  

Serdahely,  W.  J.  (1989-90).  A pediatric  near-death  experience:  Tunnel  variants.  Omega, 

20,  55-62.  

Serdahely,  W.  J.  (1990).  Pediatric  near-death  experiences.  Journal of Near-Death Studies, 

9,  33-39.  

Stevenson,  I.  (1974).  Twenty  cases  suggestive  of  reincarnation.  Charlottesville,  VA: 

University  of Virginia  Press.  

Stevenson,  I.  (1997).  Reincarnation and  biology:  A  contribution  to  the  etiology  of 

birthmarks and birth defects.  Westport,  CT:  Praeger.  

Wells,  A.  D.  (1993).  Reincarnation  beliefs  among  near-death  experiencers.  Journal of 

Near-Death Studies, 12,  17-34.  

Whitton,  J.  L.  (1986).  Life  between life.  New  York,  NY:  Warner.

